<html>
<head>
<title>WAIS Document Retrieval</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
[Congressional Record: March 23, 1995 (<strong>House</strong>)]
[Page H3581-H3631]
From the Congressional Record Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:cr23mr95-87]                         



                  PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY ACT OF 1995
  The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. Dickey). Pursuant to <strong>House</strong> Resolution 
119, and rule XXIII, the Chair declares the <strong>House</strong> in the Committee of 
the Whole <strong>House</strong> on the State of the Union for the further consideration 
of the bill H.R. 4.
                     in the committee of the whole
  Accordingly, the <strong>House</strong> resolved itself into the Committee of the 
Whole <strong>House</strong> on the State of the Union for the further consideration of 
the bill (H.R. 4) to restore the American family, reduce illegitimacy, 
control welfare spending, and reduce welfare dependence, with Mr. 
Linder in the chair.
  The Clerk read the title of the bill.
  The CHAIRMAN. When the Committee of the Whole rose on Wednesday, 
March 22, 1995, amendment No. 11 printed in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85, 
offered 
[[Page H3582]] by the gentlewoman from California [Ms. Woolsey], had 
been disposed of and the bill was open for amendment at any point.
  It is now in order to consider amendment No. 13, printed in <strong>House</strong> 
Report 104-85.


            amendment offered by Mrs. Johnson of Connecticut
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I offer amendment No. 13, 
printed in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.
  The CHAIRMAN. The clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mrs. Johnson of Connecticut: Page 87, 
     line 3, strike ``$1,943,000,000'' and insert 
     ``$2,093,000,000''.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentlewoman from Connecticut 
[Mrs. Johnson] will be recognized for 10 minutes, and a Member opposed 
will be recognized for 10 minutes.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Washington [Mr. McDermott] will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson].
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time 
as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise today to urge support of the child care 
amendment which I am offering along with Congresswomen Pryce, Dunn, and 
Waldholtz, which raises the authorization level for the child care 
grant by $150 million a year for 5 years.
  Mr. Chairman, there are three main points I would like to make with 
respect to this amendment.
  First, requiring adults to work in exchange for their benefits will 
increase the need for child care. This is inevitable. Fully 63 percent 
of families on AFDC have children age 5 and under. A significant number 
of children who are in school still need after-school care, since the 
school day and school year are much more limited than the typical 
workday and work year.
  In an ideal world, extended family would be able to provide some 
amount of this care. But in today's world day care and the need for day 
care is a reality for those on welfare and those gaining independence.
  Second, reduced child care funding puts the squeeze on the working 
poor. In recent years, AFDC participation rates have resulted in States 
offering the program tilting more and more toward welfare families and 
away from the working poor.
  Thirty-five States reported last year that they have a waiting list 
for subsidized child care for working poor. My State of Connecticut 
does not even maintain a waiting list anymore, since all slots opened 
up are already spoken for.
  As we require more women on welfare to work, this problem is going to 
get more serious, not less serious.
  I am pleased to be proposing this amendment today because I think it 
expands our resources significantly to address the child care needs 
that will develop as we reform welfare. But this amendment is not the 
whole answer. That is a point that is very important to make because 
there was a lot of misunderstanding in recent days as we debated this 
bill about how we are going to manage the child care needs that welfare 
reform will impose upon society. The heart of the solution is actually 
not this amendment; the heart of the solution is moving welfare from a 
cash-gift basis to a cash-wage basis because if everyone receiving 
welfare were also working and we used our day care resources to pay 
very skilled administrators and lead teachers, child development 
experts to run these day care centers, with welfare recipients now 
being paid to staff them, then we would in fact have the child care 
slots that we need at the money that is currently available.
  So this is simply one step forward, giving States time and resources 
to create really the much greater, broader child care opportunity, 
better connected to education, work, and training that real reform 
demands.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
                              {time}  1100
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, Members of the <strong>House</strong>, we have again a fig leaf on the 
other side. They have written the bill, they have gotten it out here. 
Then they did a poll. On Monday they did a poll; a Republican pollster 
did a poll, and found that 67 percent of Americans believe the 
Government should help pay for child care for mothers on welfare. They 
found that 54 percent of those surveyed opposed eliminating 
requirements to State-set minimum health and safety standards for child 
care. So they said, ``This is awful what we did. We've cut 400,000 kids 
out of child care.''
  So they have come out here with an amendment today. It is a fig leaf. 
It puts 100,000 back on. There is still 300,000 kids who will not get 
welfare child care under this bill.
  There should be no mistake about it; this does not solve the problem. 
The gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] is absolutely correct. 
It is a fig leaf because they got a poll that said they were in 
trouble.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 2\1/2\ minutes to the gentlewoman from 
Connecticut [Mrs. Kennelly].
  Mrs. KENNELLY. Mr. Chairman, this goes right to the heart of the 
debate, and the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] and I have 
worked on some of these issues over the years, but we part company 
today in addressing day care; the reason is that the Republican bill 
block grants and sends everything back to the State. What we would like 
to do in the Deal amendment is to make sure some of the programs that 
do work stay in the Federal purview.
  H.R. 4 repeals a transitional child care program which guarantees day 
care for the children of parents who leave welfare. This is needed. It 
repeals an AFDC child care program which provides day care for parents 
attempting to get off welfare, and H.R. 4 repeals the at-risk child 
care program for people that try to stay off and do not want to go back 
on, and so we have this amendment before us which is a good amendment 
because it has additional dollars for day care.
  However, Mr. Chairman, the amendment has the correct idea; 
unfortunately the vehicle is the incorrect vehicle. Block grants will 
not be able to provide more with less. If you are serious about taking 
people off welfare and putting them to work, in many cases you have to 
see there is adequate day care. That is what the programs we are ending 
tried to do.
  One of the best parts of the Federal program is taking care of three 
groups needing child care: The family on welfare trying to get off, the 
family that was on welfare and doesn't want to go back, and the family 
in danger of going on welfare. If you work, want to work, or need to 
work, you often need help--especially if you are a single head of 
household. I commend the woman and Mrs. Johnson for putting forth this 
amendment.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, before yielding to my 
colleague from Ohio, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I do want to mention that this amendment was put in 
well before that poll. This is not a poll response. This was put in 
after all the bills came out of committees. We had a chance to evaluate 
their interaction and how the program would work, and this is the money 
that then we decided was needed to be added in order to ensure that 
welfare reform will work for women and children and provide security 
and opportunity in the future.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Ohio [Ms. 
Pryce].
  Ms. PRYCE. Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of this amendment 
offered by my friend, the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson], 
commend her for her efforts, and in strong objection to the fact that 
there was a statement from the other side that this was the result of a 
poll. This is the result of mostly hard work, consultation with 
Governors and working the numbers, as the gentlewoman from Connecticut 
[Mrs. Johnson] just alluded to.
  Mr. Chairman, moving people from welfare to work and toward self-
sufficiency is the central goal of welfare reform. But only by removing 
the barriers to work can we achieve this goal.
  It is clear that lack of affordable quality child care is a primary 
obstacle 
[[Page H3583]] to employment for many parents, especially single 
mothers. If we are going to require work, and we should, our Nation's 
children must not be forgotten. As the work participation requirements 
under H.R. 4 are phased in, the demand for child care will increase 
dramatically. Federal child care dollars will need to serve today's 
working poor, as well as the new welfare families who will be entering 
the workplace.
  All Americans have an interest in meaningful welfare reform that 
encourages work. Our Nation also has an intense interest in ensuring 
that our children are cared for, especially in their early years so 
that they can grow into responsible, productive citizens. The 
investment H.R. 4 makes in child care will contribute to this goal. 
Young children watching parents go to work every day is a lesson in 
life that cannot be taught any other way.
  Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues to support the Johnson-Pryce-Dunn-
Waldholtz amendment to make sure we take care of America's children 
while their parents experience the dignity of work and move into self-
sufficiency.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Michigan [Mr. Levin].
  Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Chairman, this amendment is better than nothing, but 
it really is not good enough. Real welfare reform is critical. The 
status quo is indeed dead. The key to welfare reform is work, and 
important for getting people off of welfare into work is child care.
  H.R. 4 would gut the child care provisions, and what this does is to 
try to retrieve some of that. According to one estimate, 32 percent of 
what is cut out of H.R. 4 would be restored here.
  So, Mr. Chairman, a third of a loaf is better than none, but it is 
going to leave many people who are on welfare, who must get to work, 
without the provision of child care. The Deal bill goes all the way in 
terms of making work a reality and making day care available, and that 
is why I support the Deal bill.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he 
may consume to the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Goodling], chairman 
of the Committee on Economic and Educational Opportunities.
  Mr. GOODLING. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman from Connecticut 
[Mrs. Johnson] for giving me the time and also for sponsoring the 
amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, when the legislation left our committee, I said to the 
Committee on Ways and Means that I had two concerns about what we had 
done in committee. One was that perhaps in the outyears we did not have 
sufficient money. I was not worried about the 1st year or the 2d year 
as far as day care was concerned, but I was worried about the outyears, 
and she is taking care of that. The other concern that I had dealt with 
legal aliens, which I believe will be taken care of later also.
  Mr. Chairman, the beauty of the gentlewoman's amendment is that she 
goes way above what the CBO baseline projects for spending over this 5 
years. CBO baseline says 9,396,000,000. With the amendment offered by 
the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] we are now up to 
10,515,000,000. So there is a sizable increase over what the CBO 
baseline projects, and I am happy to support the gentlewoman's 
amendment.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from 
Michigan [Mr. Kildee], and I ask unanimous consent that he be allowed 
to control that time.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Washington?
  There was no objection.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the amendment offered 
by the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] because it makes the 
bill marginally better. But the structure that has been changed in this 
bill really will not permit me to vote for the bill itself, but I will 
support the amendment in case this bill passes, that we will have 
marginally recognized that this child care is very, very important. Let 
me give my colleagues an example.
  I have been in public life for 30 years now, and of course for 30 
years, like many of my colleagues in public life, I have been asked to 
try to get people jobs. I can recall in one instance I got a woman a 
job working in a restaurant in Flint, MI, and she had three children, 
and she was so happy to get that job, but she really did not have any 
reliable child care. She worked on that job less than 2 weeks and found 
that in less than 2 weeks she had four or five different arrangements 
for child care, with her grandparents, with a sister, with a neighbor. 
One day the kids were left alone--that was the last day she worked--
left home alone, asking a neighbor to look in once in a while on them.
  Mr. Chairman, that is a cruel choice to give to women, to tell them 
that they should work, and certainly work is much to be preferred to 
welfare, but to force a woman to have no reliable child care, to rely 
upon a neighbor, a sister, a grandparent, and then the worst choice, to 
leave them home alone, and that, for her, was the last she could 
choose, and she had to leave that job. Now we can do better than that.
  Now I support the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from 
Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson], but the structure and the cuts we have here 
in child care are enormous. By the year 2000, fiscal year 2000, in 
Michigan, Michigan will lose $16.1 million for this and lose almost 
10,000 child care slots. Now, albeit the Johnson amendment does 
marginally improve that, under that Michigan, by the year 2000, will 
lose $12.1 million and lose only 7,400 slots. But I am concerned about 
those 7,400 slots. That is why I cannot support this bill, but the 
gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] is marginally improving the 
bill with her amendment.
  So, Mr. Chairman, I would urge the support of the amendment offered 
by the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] but urge the defeat 
of the bill.
  Mr. GOODLING. Mr. Chairman, as the designee of the gentleman from 
Texas [Mr. Archer], I move to strike the last word in order to receive 
the 5 minutes of debate time as provided for in the rule.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman has that right.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, how much time do I have 
remaining?
  The CHAIRMAN. Eight and a half minutes.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Including the 5 minutes just yielded?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentlewoman is correct.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the 
gentlewoman from Washington [Ms. Dunn], a member of the Committee on 
Ways and Means and the chief sponsor of this amendment.
  Ms. DUNN of Washington. Mr. Chairman, on behalf of some of America's 
neediest and yet valued citizens, we begin the process of ending 
welfare as a way of life and restoring welfare assistance to its 
original purpose, to provide temporary help to our neighbors in need.
  Mr. Chairman, Americans are a generous people who have long 
demonstrated our commitment to help our neighbors, families and 
children in need, but the American people also ask for results for our 
efforts.
  To the American taxpayers who have, so far, spent $5 trillion to 
support what has been described by both sides in this <strong>House</strong> debate as a 
failed welfare system, let me assure them that our bill is a botton-up 
review. The Republican bill will remove the incentives that encourage 
welfare dependency and provide new incentives that encourage work and 
lift people from the cycle of poverty.
  As part of providing support to the soon-to-be working mothers, Mr. 
Chairman, we are offering an amendment that will provide an additional 
$750 million in child care funding to these parents. As people move off 
welfare the women with children, especially preschool children, could 
be caught in a trap. Rightfully they are required to enter the work 
force, and yet also rightfully they are worried about the safety of 
their children. Our amendment helps newly working mothers meet their 
personal responsibility obligations and address the legitimate concerns 
for their children.
  Last Saturday, Mr. Chairman, at home in Washington State I met with a 
group of welfare mothers at a Head Start meeting. They were unanimous 
and emphatic in their desire to get off 
[[Page H3584]] welfare, but one thing they did ask for help on was the 
responsibility of funding day care. Help them find good day care, and 
they will take the responsibility of finding work in the private 
sector.
  Mr. Chairman, as a single mother who raised two sons, I know the 
value of good day care and the peace of mind when it is found. I urge 
my colleagues to support this amendment.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as she may consume to the 
gentlewoman from California [Ms. Pelosi].
  Ms. PELOSI. Mr. Chairman, as the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Kildee] 
pointed out in his very poignant story about the mother who had to 
choose between leaving her child at home or going to work to provide 
for that child, nothing is more important in moving, transitioning, 
poor women from welfare to work than the availability of quality child 
care, and that is what is so sad about H.R. 4, because it eliminates 
child care assistance to more than 400,000 low-income children in the 
year 2000, it eliminates child care funding now guaranteed for AFDC 
recipients participating in education, training or work activities. It 
eliminates the child funding now guaranteed for 12 months to AFDC 
recipients making the transition from welfare to work, and it cuts more 
child care services by $2.4 billion over the next 5 years.
  Now the amendment offered by our colleagues, the gentlewoman from 
Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson], the gentlewoman from Ohio [Ms. Pryce] and 
the gentlewoman from Utah [Mrs. Waldholtz], is a step in the right 
direction, and I commend the sponsors for offering it, but I recall a 
story by the former Governor of Texas who said, ``You can put lipstick 
on a sow and call it Monique, but it's still a pig,'' and this, I 
contend, is a cosmetic change to this terrible bill, H.R. 4.
  In my State of California, H.R. 4 cuts out 35,000 child care slots. 
This bill would restore 9,000 of those. That, as I said, is a step in 
the right direction.
  It is interesting to me that our colleagues keep saying why are you 
criticizing H.R. 4, it is a great bill, and then come to the floor with 
25 amendments of their own to make the bill more acceptable, this being 
one of them, this not being enough, because it does not restore 
traditional, transitional child care services that have been proven 
essential to move mothers with young children from welfare to work, 
does not ensure that the additional funds it authorizes will even be 
available. It only raises the authorization level, and without it being 
an entitlement, the funds may never be there, and would continue to 
cut, I repeat, cut child care services for more than 300,000 low-income 
children in the year 2000. It would continue to pit poor parents and 
their demands to children and to work to provide for those children. It 
addresses the basic fundamental problem with this bill, it is weak on 
work, cheats children, and rewards the rich, all of this to give a tax 
break to the wealthiest Americans.
  Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues to vote against H.R. 4. I commend 
the Members for introducing this amendment.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself 15 seconds.
  Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify the Record. The Deal bill sets aside 
$3.5 billion. The CBO baseline estimate is $4.8 billion, for a total of 
approximately $8.3 billion. With the Johnson amendment, our bill will 
provide $10.5 billion for day care. So there is absolutely nothing cut.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Utah [Mrs. 
Waldholtz], a chief sponsor of this bill and an esteemed freshman 
colleague.
  Mrs. WALDHOLTZ. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding 
time to me.
  Mr. Chairman, one of the greatest failings of our current welfare 
system is that it forces people to choose between work and benefits.
  One of the fundamental principles of this bill is that people should 
be encouraged and rewarded for work, and this bill gives them that 
opportunity.
  But parents cannot reasonably be expected to work their way out of 
dependency if while they are working their children are not safely 
cared for.
  The dangers of inadequate child care are obvious. And forcing low-
income parents to make a choice between welfare and work based on their 
ability to afford adequate child care is cruel--and undercuts our 
efforts to encourage work and promote self-sufficiency.
  This amendment increases the bill's child care block grant by $750 
million, so that the States can fund their own affordable child care 
programs for low-income and working welfare parents.
  It will help ensure safe care for our children, and help their 
parents go to work and stay at work by giving them peace of mind that 
their children are cared for.
  I am proud to join with my colleagues in making this important 
change, and I strongly urge my colleagues to support this amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Washington [Mr. McDermott], has 1 
minute remaining and has the right to close.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, to extend the debate I move to strike 
the last word, and ask unanimous consent to merge that additional time 
with the time I am presently controlling.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Washington?
  There was no objection.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Georgia [Mr. Deal].
  Mr. DEAL. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, first of all, I commend the gentlewoman who has offered 
this amendment, because I think it does recognize a movement in the 
right direction to correct some of the provisions of H.R. 4. It will in 
fact add back additional funds. But as I look as the scoring on this, 
it appears to me that we are still talking about cutting the funding in 
this category by some $600 million below current levels. I think that 
is what places all of us on the horns of a dilemma in this debate about 
welfare reform. On the one hand, if we are going to try to move people 
off of welfare and on to work, especially is we are talking about 
mothers, the availability of child care is an essential ingredient in 
that formula.
  If we are in fact under H.R. 4, even with the amendment, still 
cutting below current levels by $600 million, and if current levels are 
not adequate to change the status quo, then we still have a problem.
  Our Deal substitute, on the other hand, adds $3.7 billion additional 
to the child care fund, and in addition to that we have some $424 
million over a 5-year period to assist the working poor.
  I think we all recognize that this is an essential ingredient in 
making the transformation from welfare to work, and I commend the 
gentlewoman for this effort. I think it is a movement in the right 
direction. I would like to think, however, that our substitute does a 
better job.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. DEAL. I yield to the gentleman from Tennessee.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I want to associate myself with the remarks 
made by the gentleman from Georgia [Mr. Deal] and just point out that 
in the Deal bill, putting work first, you really put mothers into the 
work force, and you provide additional child care dollars for those 
mothers to go to work, in change from what current law would do. The 
Johnson amendment would, I guess, bring about some help. It will reduce 
the overall package from 400,000 to 300,000 children who will be in 
need of child care, but the Deal bill provides additional resources to 
ensure proper child care.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the 
gentleman from Florida [Mr. Shaw], the chairman of the subcommittee and 
the chief author of the welfare reform bill.
  Mr. SHAW. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding, and 
compliment her on a most-needed amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, we have discussed this in the subcommittee, we have 
discussed this in the full committee, that the success of the jobs 
program in providing real jobs in H.R. 4 would require the necessity 
for additional money to be put into child care. I would like to also 
point out to the committee that under the Deal bill, the child care 
provision is $8.3 billion over 5 years. That 
[[Page H3585]] is a total over 5 years. With the Johnson amendment, 
H.R. 4 will be $10.5 billion.
  So these are the figures. The Johnson amendment brings H.R. 4 far 
ahead of the Deal bill in the amount of money that is put into child 
care. The figures are plain, the figures are there, and you cannot 
argue with them.
  So this bill is much richer in child care and recognizes the need for 
additional child care much more than the Deal bill. I certainly would 
urge all the Members to support the amendment.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I would just point out to the chairman of the committee 
that he is mixing apples and oranges. The gentleman has taken away the 
guarantee of child care.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. 
Stenholm].
  (Mr. STENHOLM asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. STENHOLM. Mr. Chairman, I again want to come with one set of 
figures, only to hear what I believe to be true is totally wrong. It 
makes me very confused. But I do commend the gentlewoman for offering 
this amendment, because in my opinion, she makes a very badly flawed 
bill a little bit better. But I still believe very strongly the Deal 
substitute is much better, and I believe the debate will show this.
  I want to quickly recount a little conversation that I had with a 
pastor in a church in my district. He said to me, ``Charlie, if you 
just do one thing for me, I have five unwed mothers, teenage mothers, 
in my church. If you do just one thing for me, give me the child care 
money so that I can provide child care while I tell that young mother, 
go back to school and get an education. I will tell her you get that 
education, you make your grades, if you will just help me get the money 
to take care of her child when we do it.''
  That is what the Deal substitute is proposing, a workable--a workable 
substitute, not what we are being offered in H.R. 4.
  Mr. Chairman, I commend the gentlewoman for seeking to make 
improvements in the base bill. Unfortunately, I fear that even were her 
amendment to pass, the child care provisions would be inadequate. 
Therefore, I rise in opposition to the Johnson amendment which falls 
far short of the child care provisions contained in Mr. Deal's 
substitute.
  The Deal substitute provides sufficient funding for child care to 
meet the increased needs under the plan's aggressive work requirements. 
H.R. 4, on the other hand, reduces child care funding $1.4 billion 
below levels provided for under current law and does not ensure that 
child care will be available to individuals who need it.
  This amendment restores only slightly more than half of the funding 
needed to maintain current law. In addition, it still does not 
guarantee that funding will be available for welfare recipients who 
need child care assistance to move into work.
  This lack of funding for child care assistance could mean that either 
welfare recipients won't move into work, or parents will be forced to 
leave their children in unsafe or substandard care if they do get work.
  CBO estimates that the Deal substitute will provide $3.7 billion in 
child care spending to meet the increased demand for child care as more 
individuals move into work. The substitute also increases child care 
assistance for the working poor by $424 million over 5 years above the 
baseline projections.
  The Deal proposal also consolidates child care programs under a 
uniform set of rules and regulations, rather than having to comply with 
a patchwork of rules under different programs.
  The primary source of child care assistance under the Deal 
consolidated block grant would be in the form of vouchers that would be 
used by parents with the child care provider of their choice. Having 
worked on child care in past Congresses, I strongly believe we must 
continue to support parental choice as we have in the Deal substitute.
  In addition, the Deal substitute contains the most aggressive work 
requirements of any bill we will consider today. We also support these 
work requirements with funding for the transitional tools recipients 
need to make the move from welfare to work. Child care is one of the 
most important tools available for working mothers and I believe we 
must provide the necessary funding to see that they are able to work.
  Reluctantly, I urge opposition to the Johnson amendment and 
enthusiastic support for the Deal substitute.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the 
gentleman from Delaware [Mr. Castle].
  Mr. CASTLE. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding, and I 
rise in very strong support of her amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, I think child care is a vital function of our welfare 
reform efforts. If you are going to train people, have people work, you 
need to make a provision for children. But I think we should straighten 
out a few facts. One, is it the welfare reform bill that we are 
debating here actually has more money in it than the Deal bill as far 
as child care is concerned. I say that respectfully, because I do 
respect the Deal bill.
  Second, a lot of welfare recipients do not even use State-supported 
child care. We need to understand that issue as we debate this also. 
Also the structure of all this has been criticized, the structure of 
going to a block grant. I would point out a few aspects of going to a 
block grant which I think help with respect to the providing of child 
care.
  First, it provides States maximum flexibility in developing programs 
that best suit the needs of the residents. It promotes parental choice 
to help parents make their own decisions on child care to best suit 
their needs, and we get rid of State set-asides which gives us more 
money as well. It gives us flexibility, and I support the amendment.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. 
Levin].
  Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Chairman, I have tried to check out the figures of the 
gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] and I truly think they are 
wrong. You are discussing just part of the Deal bill and not all of the 
pieces that fall in place under the Deal bill. Your approach provides 
less money when you take into account the whole picture than would be 
the entitlement provision under Deal. The analysis is that you provide 
only one-third of what is cut by H.R. 4, and the Deal bill would keep 
all of it. Those are the facts.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the 
gentleman from Indiana [Mr. Roemer].
  (Mr. ROEMER asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. ROEMER. Mr. Chairman, I rise in reluctant support of this 
amendment, the Johnson-Pryce amendment. I think it is like throwing a 
bucket of water into Lake Michigan. We need that bucket of water; we 
need all the help we can get in child care. I wish that it was more.
  We have heard countless times in our Committee on Education and 
Economic Opportunities that child care is directly connected to getting 
people to work. I strongly support a tougher work requirement. But we 
want people moving off welfare onto the work rolls. We want them to be 
good parents and good workers.
  That is the way that you connect this together, by adequate funding 
in child care. We do not want them to say go to work and neglect your 
family, you cannot be a good parent. We want them to do both. This 
amendment helps in a small way do that.
  I had an amendment before the Committee on Rules that would have 
allowed States to match more money into this program, but that was not 
allowed.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Texas [Mr. de la Garza.]
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, listening to the debate, a name burns 
in my mind and in my soul. Alejandrita Hernandez, 6 years old, her 
parents working in a field in Florida. She is found raped and killed 
under a truck.
  These were poor working people, and if you reduce by one the 
availability of child care, I want it to burn in your mind, Alejandrita 
Hernandez. We are talking about savings to give tax credits to the 
rich. We are talking about not welfare, not revamping. We are missing 
the boat altogether.
  As good intentioned as all of us might be, you have not done anything 
to help Alejandrita Hernandez. You cannot bring her back. But it would 
burn in my mind and soul that her name would be forgotten so that we 
can give tax credits to $200,000 and over.
  [[Page H3586]] Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 
minute to the gentleman from California [Mr. Bilbray], who has had a 
lot of experience in this area.
  Mr. BILBRAY. Mr. Chairman, I stand here today not as a Member of 
Congress, but as somebody who operated a welfare system for a county 
that was larger than 30 States of the Union, San Diego County. I want 
to commend my colleague from Connecticut because she shows the 
awareness of the realities out there that have been ignored by the 
Federal Government for too long.
  I appreciate my colleague from Texas being concerned about the 
tragedies that have occurred. Those tragedies have occurred, Mr. 
Chairman, because of the lack of innovative approaches being allowed by 
local government. This amendment will actually allow women to 
participate in the child care process, to be part of the answer rather 
than part of the problem. And rather than what our colleagues on the 
other side of the aisle would like to do, always finance a larger, 
bigger bureaucracy, this allows the recipients to be part of the 
answer, to participate, to actually earn part of their benefits by 
participating in child care.
  Mr. Chairman, I think that the compassionate approach that our 
colleagues from Connecticut have shown should entice our colleagues on 
the other side to join us in this good amendment.
                         Parliamentary Inquiry
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary 
inquiry.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentlewoman will state it.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, is it not procedurally 
correct that I close?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentlewoman from Connecticut is choosing to amend 
the committee position. The gentleman from Washington [Mr. McDermott] 
took the committee position in opposition. He has the privilege of 
closing.
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the 
gentlewoman from Kansas [Mrs. Meyers].
  Mrs. MEYERS of Kansas. Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of this 
amendment and of the whole concept of block granting.
  We currently have seven different Federal programs: Child care for 
AFDC, Transitional Child Care, At-Risk Child Care, Child Care 
Development Block Grant, State Dependent Care Planning and Development 
Grants Program, Child Development Associate Credential Scholarship 
Program, Native American Family Centers Program.
  This is certainly not a seamless program. There is a great deal of 
bureaucracy and money spent. It is confusing to the recipients.
  I strongly support the block grant and the fact that the gentlewoman 
from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] is adding $150 million which will 
provide even more, certainly, that goes to child care than we are 
providing now. A great deal is lost in the confusion among the various 
programs. I strongly support the Johnson amendment.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may consume to 
the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Clement].
  (Mr. CLEMENT asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. CLEMENT. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the Johnson 
amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, one of the biggest barriers to work for welfare 
recipients is their inability to provide their child with safe and 
affordable care while they work.
  H.R. 4 will make it more difficult for single parents on welfare to 
move into work than it is right now.
  H.R. 4 reduces child care funding and provides no guarantee that 
child care will be available to individuals who need it.
  H.R. 4 as it is currently written reduces funding for child care 
services $1.4 billion below the current levels.
  The Johnson amendment restores more than half the cut but still 
leaves funding for child care services $650 million below current 
levels.
  Supporters of H.R. 4 claim that their bill has real work requirements 
and that they will put people to work. If this is true, they do not 
have enough money for child care and these people will not be able to 
go to work.
  So which is it? Is H.R. 4 weak on work as we assert, or is it that 
H.R. 4 is weak on funding for child care?
  Which is it? You cannot have it both ways?
  Mr. Chairman, another day of debate, another hole exposed.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.
  We have talked about numbers here. The fact is that the bill that 
came out of the committee, proposed by the gentlewoman from Connecticut 
[Mrs. Johnson] and others, repealed $4.6 billion in child care. That, 
plus the $8 million that the gentleman from Georgia [Mr. Deal] has, is 
more than $12 billion, which is more money than was presently in this 
bill. So there is no question.
  The gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson] assures us that there 
is no dealing with polls here, nobody is worried about polls. Well, I 
have a story from the Washington Times on the 5th of March where the 
gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Goodling] says, ``The only major area 
of concern I have is the area of day care.''
  This has been known since the 5th of March, when it was in the 
committee of the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Goodling]. He did 
absolutely nothing about it.
  When it gets out here on the floor and the American public figures 
out what it is all about, suddenly they say, in the poll, the 
Republicans are cutting child care; they should not be doing that.
  So we suddenly have this little fig leaf amendment. I urge that 
Members vote against this fig leaf amendment and for the bill of the 
gentleman from Georgia [Mr. Deal].
  The CHAIRMAN. All time has expired.
  The question is on the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from 
Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson].
  The amendment was agreed to.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 15 printed 
in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.


                   amendment offered by mrs. roukema
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mrs. Roukema: Page 114, strike line 4, 
     and insert the following:
       ``(b) Additional Requirements With Respect To Assistance 
     for Pregnant, Postpartum, and Breastfeeding Women, Infants, 
     and Children.--
       ``(1) Minimum amount of assistance.--The State shall
       Page 114, after line 11, insert the following paragraph:
       ``(2) Cost containment measures regarding procurement of 
     infant formula--
       ``(A) In general.--The State shall, with respect to the 
     provision of food assistance to economically disadvantaged 
     pregnant women, postpartum women, breastfeeding women, 
     infants, and young children under subsection (a)(1), 
     establish and carry out a cost containment system for the 
     procurement of infant formula.
       ``(B) Use of amounts resulting from savings.--The State 
     shall use amounts available to the State as result of savings 
     in costs to the State from the implementation of the cost 
     containment system described in subparagraph (A) for the 
     purpose of providing the assistance described in paragraphs 
     (1) through (5) of subsection (a).
       ``(C) Annual reports.--The State shall submit to the 
     Secretary for each fiscal year a report containing--
       ``(i) a description of the cost containment system for 
     infant formula implemented by the State in accordance with 
     subparagraph (A) for such fiscal year; and
       ``(ii) the estimated amount of savings in costs derived by 
     the State in providing food assistance described in such 
     subparagraph under such cost containment system for such 
     fiscal year as compared to the amount of such savings derived 
     by the State under the cost containment system for the 
     preceding fiscal year, where appropriate.
  The CHAIRMAN. Under the rule, the gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. 
Roukema] will be recognized for 10 minutes, and a Member in opposition 
will be recognized for 10 minutes.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, I am mildly opposed to the amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Kildee] will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema].
  [[Page H3587]] Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time 
as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, as you know, I am offering an amendment to H.R. 4 that 
will require States to carry out cost-containment systems for providing 
infant formula to WIC participants under the family nutrition block 
grant in H.R. 4.
  Mr. Chairman, this issue rightfully has been the source of 
considerable debate over the past few months.
  During the Opportunities Committee markup, an amendment was offered 
by my colleague from Michigan [Mr. Kildee], that would have maintained 
the current system of competitive bidding for infant formula for the 
WIC Program. This amendment, which I supported--the only Republican to 
do so--was defeated, which is why I am standing here today.
  Many Members, including myself, continue to be deeply concerned that, 
under the current system in H.R. 4, which eliminates the existing 
competitive bidding system for infant formula, States might no longer 
choose to carry out competitive bidding.
  Mr. Chairman, under current law, States are required to have infant 
formula producers bid competitively for WIC contracts, or any other 
cost-containment measure that yields equal to or greater savings than 
those achieved under competitive bidding. And, currently, according to 
the USDA, this system achieves an estimated savings of over $1 billion 
annually which is used to provide WIC services to 1.6 million 
economically disadvantaged pregnant women, postpartum women, 
breastfeeding women, infants, and young children every month. This, of 
course, is why I support retaining competitive bidding.
  And, although my amendment does not mandate competitive bidding, I 
believe that it takes a big step in ensuring that States achieve the 
necessary savings in their infant formula program so that eligible 
individuals can receive essential WIC services.
  Importantly, Mr. Chairman, my amendment would require that States use 
the savings achieved under this system for the purposes of carrying out 
all services under this nutrition block grant--child and adult care 
food, summer food, and homeless children nutrition. As a result, States 
are given the flexibility to use these savings where they see the 
greatest need.
  Moreover, my amendment would have States report annually to the 
Secretary of Agriculture on the system they are using, the savings 
achieved, and how this savings compares to that of the previous fiscal 
year. This is an important part of the amendment because it gives 
infant formula producers the incentive to keep their bids low. Without 
this safeguard, no one has to know what, if any, savings are being 
achieved. Nor can we assess whether fraudulent practices are adding to 
costs.
  Mr. Chairman, I support the block grant approach. However, some block 
grant supporters argue that States are capable of carrying out their 
own cost-containment systems without Federal involvement, and that 
States will continue to carry out cost-containment systems that best 
serve those in need. But we should not assume that States will do the 
right thing when this kind of money is at stake.
  That is precisely what this amendment attempts to do, Mr. Chairman. 
The Congress has an obligation--a fiduciary one--to evaluate and 
monitor how Federal tax dollars are being spent.
  And, I would argue against those who claim that this would be a 
mandate on the States interfering with flexibility because my amendment 
neither tells the State what type of cost-containment measure to 
implement, nor does it tell the State how much savings to achieve.
  Mr. Chairman, this is a good amendment, and a necessary one. I urge 
my colleagues to support it.
  This amendment would require States to carry out cost-containment 
systems for infant formula included in food packages provided under the 
family nutrition block grant.
  The State will report to the Secretary of Agriculture on an annual 
basis: the system it is using; the savings generated by this system; 
and how this savings compares to previous savings under the Federal 
system.
  The State shall use whatever savings it achieves for the purpose of 
providing services to the programs under the family nutrition block 
grant.
  While I am about to mention four current alternative cost-containment 
systems, States are certainly not limited to these options but can 
combine and/or devise new ways to contain costs.
  One, multisource systems--State agencies procuring infant formula can 
award contracts to the lowest bidder as well as other manufacturers 
whose bids fall within a certain price range of this bid. States can 
determine how big this margin should be.
  Two, open market rebate systems--State agencies can negotiate 
separate rebates with each infant formula manufacturer so that WIC 
participants can choose between those infant formulas being offered.
  These rebates do not increase a manufacturers market share nor will 
choosing not to offer a rebate prevent a manufacturer from having less 
shelf space.
  This merely assures smaller or newer infant formula manufacturers 
some access to the WIC infant formula market.
  Three multistate systems--cooperative purchasing--States within a 
region of the U.S. can join together under one type of rebate system to 
procure infant formula.
  Rebates tend to be higher in large States because in those States 
there are more people which means that there will most likely be more 
WIC participants and subsequently a larger market share at stake for 
which infant formula manufacturers are willing to pay a higher price.
  Conversely, rebates tend to be lower in smaller States because these 
States have smaller populations most likely translating into fewer WIC 
participants which means that the market is smaller and, subsequently, 
less of an incentive for an infant formula manufacturer to offer a low 
bid.
  It has been suggested that, as evidenced through past multistate 
systems, larger States join with other large States and that small 
States join with other small States because, when they cross over, 
smaller States will benefit with a higher rebate which might fall below 
the rebate that the larger States were originally receiving.
  Four, fixed price procurement systems--State agencies purchase infant 
formula directly from the manufacturer at some type of discounted fixed 
price.
  The infant formula can then either be distributed by the appropriate 
State agency or by the retail stores.
  And, this fixed price could be determined by all three parties 
involved--manufacturer, agency, and retailer.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, to extend debate, as the designee of the 
gentleman from Florida [Mr. Gibbons], I move to strike the last word 
and ask unanimous consent to merge that additional time with the time 
which the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Kildee] is now controlling.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Washington?
  There was no objection.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. 
Kildee].
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I am very disappointed that the Committee on Rules 
would not allow me to offer my amendment to require States to continue 
to use competitive bidding when purchasing infant formula for the WIC 
program.
  That amendment would have saved $1 billion. Although I will support 
probably, if I am persuaded, the amendment of the gentlewoman from New 
Jersey [Mrs. Roukema], as it is well-intentioned, I am skeptical that 
it will really do anything. There is a billion dollars worth of 
difference between the words ``cost containment'' and ``competitive 
bidding.'' A billion dollars worth of difference.
  The amendment of the gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema] would 
require States to use cost containment measures. Prior to the enactment 
of the 1989 law requiring States to use competitive bidding, States 
were using a variety of cost containment measures. We found that they 
just did not work. The savings were minimal.
  That is why in 1989, in a true bipartisan manner with the help of 
President George Bush, we enacted a law to require States to use 
competitive bidding in the WIC program. We found that when we required 
States to use that competitive bidding, Mr. Chairman, not mere cost 
containment, that we saved $1 billion a year, $1 billion, $1 billion 
that enabled 1\1/2\ million more 
[[Page H3588]] pregnant women and infants to be served each month under 
the WIC program.
  Many of you will say, well, the States will continue to use 
competitive bidding. But only half the States were doing that before we 
mandated that by law. The other half were using industry-favored cost 
containment systems.
  I would like to ask a question of the gentlewoman from New Jersey, 
who I know is the only Republican in committee who supported my 
amendment on competitive bidding.
  Let us say that the State enters into a contract with one of the 
infant formula companies and gets a $10,000 rebate on a $5 million 
contract.
  Would that qualify?
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. KILDEE. I yield to the gentlewoman from New Jersey.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I did not hear the gentleman. I could not 
hear the gentleman over the din.
  Mr. KILDEE. The question is, under the gentlewoman's language, if a 
State entered into a contract with an infant formula company and got a 
$10,000 rebate on a $5 million contract, would that qualify under the 
gentlewoman's language?
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, if the gentleman will continue to yield, 
if that is the cost containment program, yes. I believe that money 
would then be reinvested back into the WIC program. I am sorry. WIC or 
any other part of the block grant, as I explained in my opening 
statement.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, $100,000 would qualify then, and $1 million 
would certainly qualify, right? If they entered into a contract with an 
infant formula company and say we will get a million dollars rebate on 
a $5 million contract, a fortiori, that would qualify under the 
gentlewoman's language?
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. I think I am not quite sure what the gentleman is 
getting at, but I think he is talking about sole-source bidding, and 
maybe he is not going to make those same savings. That, of course, is 
one
 of the underlying reasons I supported the gentleman in committee.
  We do not have all those benefits here, but this is a giant step, it 
seems to me, in the right direction of exercising, maintaining the 
flexibility of the States and still exercising our fiduciary 
responsibility.
  Mr. KILDEE. My point is that under the gentlewoman's language, a 
$10,000 rebate would qualify for a $5 million contract, and a $1 
million rebate would qualify under a $5 million contract. The fact of 
the matter is that we would do better under a competitive bidding than 
a $1 million rebate under a $5 million contract. We found that out. We 
would save much more under competitive bidding.
  So the gentlewoman can see the markup they have on infant formula. We 
would do far more than even if we got a $1 million rebate on a $5 
million contract, if we used the language I wanted to use and which the 
gentlewoman supported in committee, to her great credit, competitive 
bidding.
  Competitive bidding saves $1 billion a year. We found that out as 
soon as we enacted this in 1989. So the most generous cost containment 
that could be used under the gentlewoman's language would be far less a 
savings than competitive bidding. There is a $1 billion worth of 
difference between cost containment and competitive bidding.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Pennsylvania [Mr. Goodling], the chairman of the committee.
  Mr. GOODLING. I thank the gentlewoman for yielding me the time.
  I want to echo what she said because it is what I have said since day 
1, that we do not believe in block grants as revenue sharing. We set 
the goals and that is what she is doing. The gentleman from Michigan is 
correct. Back in the old days, and it seems we cannot get beyond the 
old days. But back in the olden days, States did not know all those 
things. They learned all those things now. Would it not be kind of 
foolish now to walk away from the opportunity of getting an extra $1 
billion, or $2 billion if you can get that? So what she does is give 
that flexibility to the States. I cannot imagine any State anywhere 
walking away from getting the biggest amount that they can possibly 
get. As I said, they have learned how to do that now. Ten years ago, 
they did not know that. But they have the experience. So I think the 
gentlewoman's amendment is one that should be accepted and it will go a 
long way to take care of those we wish to take care in a flexible 
manner that more can be served than have been served in the past. I 
would hope all would support her amendment.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  I would say that I certainly would hope that we all learn from 
subsequent actions. But I having served 12 years in State government 
know the influence of the infant formula companies on State government. 
They do various things on cost containment. They will promise the 
university hospital so much infant formula. They will promise the 
health department so much. They work very closely with the legislature 
too.
  I know that there can be other inducements not nearly as advantageous 
to the taxpayers and to the women and the infants as competitive 
bidding. If you think they are going to do it, why are you so reluctant 
to put it into law?
  The gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Goodling] worked with me in 
1989. He, George Bush, and the gentleman from Oregon [Mr. Wyden], 
worked with me to get that language in. I think we need that language 
because I know how the infant formula companies work in the various 
States.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Oregon [Mr. 
Wyden].
  Mr. WYDEN. I want to thank the gentleman for his good work.
  Let me start by saying that I brought to the floor a can of infant 
formula which costs a little bit over 30 cents a can to manufacture and 
sells retail in our stores for maybe $2.70 a can. As a result of the 
free enterprise system that we brought to WIC on a bipartisan basis in 
1989, as my colleague has said, we get 1 billion dollars' worth of 
taxpayer efficiency on this program every year.
  But what I want to say to my colleagues is that after all the talk of 
free enterprise that we have heard from the other side this session, as 
a result of this bill, even with the Roukema amendment, we will be 
going back to the old days of closed markets and backroom contracting.
  We ought to note that the gentlewoman from New Jersey wanted to do 
this right and to keep competitive bidding. What will happen even with 
this amendment is a lot of States will not have to do sealed bids which 
is the way to have real competition. We will also see the infant 
formula companies going about this country offering inducements to the 
States to reject competitive bidding and go with cost containment.
  I would like to mention that the Federal Trade Commission, the 
experts there, are alarmed not just about the negative aspects for WIC 
of eliminating competitive bidding, they have written to me and they 
have said that by eliminating competitive bidding, we will reduce 
competition for infant formula in our stores and for the general 
market.
  The reason that is the case is the way these giant infant formula 
companies get known is to move into the WIC market and get the public 
familiar with their product.
  I just say to my colleagues, particularly on the other side, let us 
reinvent Government where it does not work. This is an example of a 
program where free enterprise, that the parties worked on together in 
1989, has worked. As a result, we are going to be eliminating 
competitive bidding. That is going to take milk from the mouths of poor 
infants and it is going to give cookies and cream to the infant formula 
companies and that is wrong.
  Mr. Chairman, I include the following for the Record.
                                     Federal Trade Commission,
                                   Washington, DC, March 16, 1995.
     Hon. Ron Wyden,
     U.S. <strong>House</strong> of Representatives,
     Washington, DC.
       Dear Representative Wyden: Chairman Steiger forwarded a 
     copy of your March 8, 1995 letter to me and asked that I 
     respond to your inquiries. In that letter, you indicated that 
     the <strong>House</strong> Economic and Education Opportunities Committee had 
     voted to end the competitive bidding requirement for infant 
     [[Page H3589]] formula contracts that are part of the Special 
     Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children 
     (``WIC''). You also noted that three companies dominate the 
     infant formula industry and you pointed to a possible effect 
     in the general retail market from eliminating bidding 
     requirements in the WIC Program, namely, that it might 
     discourage new companies from entering the infant formula 
     market. In this regard, you asked that, based on our 
     experience in dealing with competitive issues related to the 
     WIC and general retail market for infant formula, we respond 
     to a series of questions.
       I should point out that while I have not studied the 
     proposed legislation to which you referred, I have been 
     involved in lengthy litigations relating to the WIC and 
     general retail markets for infant formula, and I am able to 
     provide you with my views on the questions you have raised. 
     These views, of course, are my own and do not necessarily 
     reflect the views of the Commission or any individual 
     Commissioner. This response does not provide any non-public 
     information and, accordingly, I do not request confidential 
     treatment.
       1. Do you believe that eliminating competitive bidding for 
     infant formula in the WIC market will discourage competition 
     in the general market for infant formula? Please explain.
       I agree with your assessment that competitive bidding in 
     the WIC program makes entry into the infant formula market 
     easier. I also agree that to the extent that competitive 
     bidding in the WIC market is eliminated or made less likely, 
     then competition in the general retail market for infant 
     formula would be adversely affected.
       The infant formula market is highly concentrated, with 
     three companies accounting for the vast majority of sales. As 
     I describe below, concentrated markets, sometimes referred to 
     as oligopolies, often result in higher prices for consumers 
     whether or not the companies have engaged in unlawful 
     collusion, particularly where the companies sell a 
     homogeneous product and there are high barriers to entry.
       Entry into a concentrated market can have significant 
     procompetitive effects in a variety of ways. First, new entry 
     into a concentrated market will make it more difficult for 
     the existing companies to collude. For example, in a given 
     market otherwise susceptible to collusion, a price-fixing 
     agreement among three companies is easier to achieve and 
     maintain than would be an agreement among four companies. The 
     fourth company not only adds a forth party that must be 
     convinced to violate the law, but it also is likely to have 
     different incentives than the other companies by virtue of 
     its smaller market share. Expansion may be a more profitable 
     strategy than collusion if the company's share is small.
       Second, even absent collusion, companies in an oligopoly 
     act interdependently. That is, each company recognizes that 
     its pricing decisions affect others in the industry. For 
     example, if one firm raises prices above the competitive 
     level in an oligopoly, the other firms independently 
     recognize that they have two choices. They can raise prices a 
     similar amount, resulting in each company increasing profits. 
     Alternatively, they can maintain their prices, resulting in 
     the price leader being forced to withdraw its price increase 
     so as not to lose market share, resulting in each of the 
     companies forgoing the opportunity for increased profits. 
     Prices in an oligopoly, accordingly, are often higher than 
     they would be in a competitive market. If new entry occurs in 
     such a market, the likelihood of the incumbent firms being 
     able to continue their interdependent conduct is lessened.
       Finally, in general, when additional productive capacity 
     and supply created by a new firm is added to the market, that 
     additional supply will also have a downward effect on price. 
     Other things being equal, as the supply of a product goes up, 
     prices tend to go down.
       Competitive bidding in the WIC Program makes entry into the 
     market easier because a new or small company can, by winning 
     one bid, assure itself of a large portion of the market for 
     an extended period of time. The WIC segment of the market 
     accounted for approximately 40% of infant formula sales in 
     the early 1990's. Winning a WIC bid also effectively assures 
     the winning company of obtaining significant shelf space at 
     retail outlets, which can result in what the industry refers 
     to as ``spill-over'' sales in the non-WIC retail market. The 
     brand name recognition resulting from the significant shelf 
     space typically given to the WIC bid winner is a substantial 
     benefit to the winning company. Finally, obtaining a large 
     WIC contract also can help the company achieve economies of 
     scale in the production of formula, allowing the company to 
     sell at lower prices to non-WIC consumers.
       2. What is your best estimate of the impact of eliminating 
     competitive bidding for WIC infant formula contracts? Please 
     explain the likely effects on WIC users and federal 
     taxpayers.
       Early in the history of the WIC Program, the USDA observed 
     that individual state WIC programs that used sole source 
     competitive bidding systems obtained larger savings than 
     those that used ``open market'' systems preferred by the 
     infant formula companies. Under an open market system, all 
     companies can participate in the program, and WIC 
     participants can choose any company's product.
       Because of competitive pressures associated with bidding 
     for a sole source contract, where sole source bidding was 
     required the amounts of rebates offered by the formula 
     companies escalated over time. These rebates allowed the 
     states to add additional families to the WIC Program, thereby 
     serving more people with the federal grant.
       These sole source rebates benefitted people in other states 
     as well. Under competitive bid procedures, the states often 
     received rebates that were high enough that the state itself 
     did not need the entire amount of the rebate. In such cases, 
     rebate funds were returned to USDA where the money was 
     reallocated to other states.
       As described below, some state WIC programs, in the absence 
     of a federal requirement that there be competitive bidding, 
     preferred that open market systems be utilized. This 
     preference for open market systems in some states existed 
     despite the understanding that competitive bids resulted in 
     lower infant formula prices and despite the understanding 
     that the federal government preferred competitive bidding.
       Competitive bidding has been shown to result in many 
     millions of dollars in savings to the federal taxpayer. If 
     competitive bidding requirements are eliminated, states may 
     again choose to forego competitive bid programs in favor of 
     open market systems that provide significantly lower levels 
     of rebates. In other words, states may choose to opt for 
     programs, paid for by the federal government, that result in 
     higher infant formula prices.
       3. What are the factors that tend to increase the 
     likelihood of anti-competitive collusion by companies and are 
     these factors present in the infant formula market?
       Anticompetitive behavior is more likely in markets where 
     sales are concentrated in the hands of few sellers, where the 
     product at issue is relatively homogeneous, where the firms 
     selling the product are relatively homogeneous, and where 
     there are high barriers to entry.
       The infant formula market has these very characteristics. 
     The top three firms accounted for in excess of 90% of the 
     market in the early 1990's. Federal standards for nutritional 
     quality and safety make infant formula a relatively 
     homogeneous product. Each of the top three firms selling 
     infant formula is a pharmaceutical company; each is similarly 
     integrated; and each markets formula in a similar fashion. 
     Finally, barriers to entry into the manufacture and sale of 
     infant formula are high.
       4. Last year, the state of California decided rather than 
     bid out a new WIC formula cost containment contract, they 
     would extend the existing contract for another year. However, 
     because of the 1987 competitive bidding statute, the USDA 
     required them to re-bid the contract at the end of the year.
       This process saved the taxpayer $22.4 million in the cost 
     of infant formula. A similar situation in South Carolina 
     ended up saving taxpayers $8.97 million in the cost of infant 
     formula.
       From past FTC investigations and current information you 
     may have available, what pressures and incentives do the 
     infant formula companies use to keep states from bidding out 
     infant formula contracts?
       Under the sole source competitive bid procedures, with 
     exceptions being made for physician prescriptions, WIC 
     participants must use one brand of formula. Although all of 
     the brands meet statutory nutritional requirements, some 
     parents prefer one brand over another and made their feelings 
     known to the state WIC director. To avoid dissatisfaction of 
     some WIC participants, some WIC directors prefer the open 
     market system under which parents can choose any brand of 
     formula.
       Because the infant formula companies preferred the more 
     profitable open market system, they were willing to provide 
     the state WIC programs with rebates under an open market 
     system. These open market rebates, though in some cases 
     convincing state WIC programs to opt for open market 
     programs, were considerably lower than the rebates that could 
     be obtained through competitive bidding.
       In addition, formula companies and state WIC programs can 
     structure open market rebates in a way that may meet the 
     state's needs but that result in smaller savings for the 
     federal government. For example, in 1990 in Puerto Rico, a 
     system was put into place under which an open market was 
     permitted by the local WIC program as long as the companies 
     were willing to provide payments, outside of the WIC program, 
     to the Puerto Rico health care system. These side payments 
     were not returnable to the federal government as would be 
     rebate payments not used by the program. Under this system, 
     the formula companies offered WIC rebates equal to 
     approximately $6.5 million in 1991. In 1992, after a 
     competitive bid, the winning company's bid was estimated to 
     result in an annual rebate of approximately $23.4 million.
       Thank you for giving me the opportunity to provide you with 
     my views. If I can be of further assistance to you, please do 
     not hesitate to call me at (202) 326-2821.
           Sincerely,
                                          Michael E. Antalics,
                                            Assistant Director for
                                            Non-Merger Litigation.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Florida [Mr. Bilirakis].
  (Mr. BILIRAKIS asked and was given permission to revise and extend 
his remarks.)
  [[Page H3590]] Mr. BILIRAKIS. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman 
for yielding me the time.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the Roukema amendment.
  Since coming to Congress, I have been a strong proponent of the 
Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children [WIC]. WIC 
funding buys nutritious foods that are tailored to the dietary needs of 
participants and provides nutrition education for participants.
  WIC is a cost-effective program that saves the Government money. 
Every dollar spent on pregnant women by WIC produces between $2 to $4 
in Medicaid savings for newborns and their mothers. In 1992, WIC 
benefits averted $853 million in health expenditures during the first 
year of life of infants.
  Under the current program, States are required to use a competitive 
bidding system or other savings mechanisms for the procurement of 
infant formula used in WIC packages. In 1994, $1.1 billion in rebate 
revenue was generated from the manufacturers of infant formula, 
allowing 1.5 million more participants to be served.
  My home State of Florida earned over $53 million from its infant 
formula rebate contract. These funds were used to provide services to 
more than 100,000 additional clients. Clearly, cost-containment is an 
important component of the current WIC Program.
  The family-based nutrition block grant does not require States to 
establish a cost-containment system. The Roukema amendment addresses 
this important issue and my State of Florida strongly supports her 
amendment.
  Given the tremendous savings States are able to achieve through 
current cost-containment contracts, it is imperative that all States 
establish cost-containment systems and apply those savings to providing 
more services under the family nutrition block grant.
  Over the last several weeks. I have heard from many constituents who 
are concerned about the impact H.R. 4 will have on the WIC Program. My 
constituents are very concerned that funding for WIC would be 
drastically reduced under a block grant.
  Fortunately, the Committee on Economic and Educational Opportunities 
recognized the effectiveness of the WIC Program. The family nutrition 
block grant requires that 80 percent of available funds be used for 
WIC. This means that under H.R. 4, WIC funding will increase by $500 
million more than is provided under current law.
  The WIC Directors in my district also raised concerns that revisions 
to current nutrition programs will negatively impact the WIC program's 
effectiveness. Although H.R. 4 requires States to set minimum 
nutritional requirements for food assistance, they are concerned that 
under a block grant, nutrition standards will vary from State to State.
  But as they point out, nutrition needs do not vary from State to 
State. The WIC Directors I have spoken to feel it is important to 
preserve the requirement for national nutritional standards.
  WIC Directors are also concerned that State nutritional standards 
will not be based on science. However, H.R. 4 requires the food and 
nutrition board of the institute of medicine to develop model nutrition 
standards for food assistance provided to women, infants, and children.
  These standards must be developed in cooperation with pediatricians, 
nutritionists, and directors of programs providing nutritional risk 
assessment, and nutrition counseling. Hopefully, all States will adopt 
these model standards.
  When H.R. 4 is enacted into law, the Congress must conduct sufficient 
oversight of the implementation of the family nutrition block grant to 
ensure that women, infants, and children receive proper nutrition 
assistance.
  I have seen what the WIC program can do for children and their 
mothers. We must make sure our reform efforts do not erode the ability 
of a proven program like WIC to provide essential services to women and 
children.
  I urge my colleagues to support the Roukema amendment.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, I want to reiterate, under present law we 
require competitive bidding, not just cost containment.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from North 
Carolina [Mrs. Clayton].
  Mrs. CLAYTON. I thank the gentleman for allowing me to have some 
time.
  I also want to commend the gentlewoman from New Jersey in her 
intention and support her effort and think that this is a step in the 
right direction but it does not correct the problem.
  The problem is that the program works right now. We have competitive 
bidding. In fact, if part of the reason for reforming is to save money, 
this bidding process and procedure we have allows us now to save the 
money. It allows us to save money and it is fiscally responsible.
  But I ask my colleagues in Congress to recall that the infant 
mortality rate in America before WIC was horrendous. We need to remind 
ourselves why the WIC program is important.
  It is important, therefore, to increase the savings. We had rates 
much lower than we have now and in fact we have increased the rate by 
reducing the infant mortality by increasing the opportunity for 
children to live.
  WIC works. We want to do everything possible to make this successful 
program work.
  We also ask Members of Congress to recall a fact that since the 
institution of the nutritional program, we really have less of a gap 
between low-income diets and those who have affluence and have other 
means of getting their funds.
  Spending has been increased by some 65 percent. Anemia has been 
drastically improved. In fact, low-weight babies have increased.
  I visited my neonatal clinic of the hospital and found that the cost 
just of maintaining a low-weight baby is horrendous, $5,000 and 
$10,000.
  Yet the investment we make in WIC makes all the sense. It saves 
lives. It saves money.
  I urge my colleagues to note that what we are doing here really does 
not correct the issue. It is a movement in the right direction, but how 
we should correct it is keep the current bidding sealed.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, one thing I would like to say before I 
yield, there seems to be a pattern in the Committee on Rules on this 
bill. One Member goes up, asking for a substantive amendment, an 
amendment that makes a real difference, competitive bidding. Another 
Member asks what really is a cosmetic amendment and the Committee on 
Rules in every instance has granted the amendment for the cosmetic 
amendment, not the substantive. I object to that.
   Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Pennsylvania 
[Mr. Foglietta].
  Mr. FOGLIETTA. I thank the gentleman for yielding me the time.
  I would like to have permission to be a little bit more general in my 
approach to the discussion today. There has been lots of talk today and 
in the last couple of days about the block grant approach as was quoted 
by our gentlewoman from New Jersey as being the proper way to 
administer these programs for the unfortunate and the poor.
  Let me tell Members about a community in the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania who had that option on a local level. This community had a 
substantial number of poor people living below the poverty line, but 
this community decided not to accept the School Lunch Program. Instead, 
I will tell you what they did. This community established a sharing 
table. They established a sharing table, a table in the middle of the 
lunchroom where the more affluent children would come in. If they did 
not finish their sandwiches, if they did not finish their cokes, they 
would leave what was left over on the sharing table for the poorer 
children. So that they could come in and eat the scraps of the 
sandwiches and what was left over of the sodas.
  Could you think of anything more dehumanizing? Could you think of 
anything more destructive of self-esteem, of self-pride, and of self-
worth than that kind of a program? There may be many things wrong with 
these programs, and we should be fixing them, and we should be 
correcting them. But sending them back to the States is not the answer.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentlewoman from New Jersey is recognized for 1\1/
2\ minutes.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I would like to summarize what we have 
said here. This is a good amendment, it allows the States the maximum 
flexibility. It requires reporting to the Department of Agriculture so 
that Congress can continue their oversight responsibility here. I must 
say that I think if we had inquired with all the States that are 
represented here today, we would have found something similar to the 
endorsement that we got from our colleague the gentleman from Florida, 
namely that 100,000 more clients are served in the State of Florida 
using these types of cost containment measures.
  I urge support. I think that it marries the best of the block grant 
approach with the accountability standards that we as a Congress must 
ensure.
  Mr. KILDEE. Mr. Chairman, only because the gentlewoman from New 
Jersey had the courage to vote for my amendment in committee, the only 
Republican who had that courage to do so, I will support her amendment 
even though it is grossly inadequate.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield the balance of my time to the gentlewoman from 
Colorado [Mrs. Schroeder].
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentlewoman from Colorado is recognized for 1\1/2\ 
minutes.
  Mrs. SCHROEDER. I thank the gentleman from Michigan for yielding me 
the time.
  I say many will reluctantly support that amendment because I guess 
that is all that side could do.
  I think the gentleman from Michigan made a very good point, that 
these are really cosmetic amendments that do not go to the core of real 
competitive bidding, but it is all they could get agreement on.
                              {time}  1200
  In a way you feel it is almost like we are putting lipstick on pigs 
here, but when you get all done you still got a pig and that is what 
the other bill is.
  We know that we desperately need competitive bidding. I have spent 22 
years on the Committee on Armed Services and believe me, that is where 
we got the $900 toilet seats. If you do not want that in infant 
formula, then what we really have to do is be voting for the Democratic 
bill because you are not going to get there with this.
  We have letters written to Congressman Wyden from the Federal Trade 
Commission talking about the experience of the State of California and 
the experience of the State of South Carolina in competitive bidding. I 
do not have time to go into it, but we have got data all over the place 
that is showing regretfully some of these companies who should have 
better intentions. If they think they can get away with spending more, 
they will.
  Remember, we had $25 million worth of WIC cuts and rescissions, and 
here we go again; if we do not have competitive bidding fully, one more 
time we will be having another cut because we will be knocking people 
out.
  Mr. GOODLING. Mr. Chairman, as the designee of Chairman Archer, I 
move to strike the requisite number of words in order to receive an 
additional 5 minutes of debate time as provided under the rule.
  I yield myself the first 30 seconds. I want to assure my colleague 
from Pennsylvania that under our program he can be assured that that 
will never happen in his community again, because we have the rules and 
regulations on how they have to spend the money.
  I would say to my friend from Michigan, cosmetics is a good term I 
suppose. The old Committee on Rules always used to say, ``Well, that 
makes good sense,'' and then you knew positively it would not be made 
in order.
  So it is a little different from cosmetic that it makes good sense; 
it is not in order.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield the remaining 4\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman 
from California [Mr. Cunningham].


                        parliamentary inquiries
  Mr. McDERMOTT. A parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state his parliamentary inquiry.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, is this amendment time on the amendment 
we are discussing or is this on the next amendment?
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. It is on the next amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Goodling] struck 
the last word on the Roukema amendment. The Chair would like to point 
out to the gentleman from Washington that most of the debate has not 
been on that amendment; it has been on the bill.
  Mr. GOODLING. Mr. Chairman, I yield my time to the gentleman from 
California [Mr. Cunningham].
  Mr. VOLKMER. A parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state his parliamentary inquiry.
  Mr. VOLKMER. Even though the debate in the past has not been on the 
amendment, is not the rule of the <strong>House</strong>, regular order, that the debate 
that follows would still be on the amendment even though others have 
not debated the amendment?
  The CHAIRMAN. Unless a point of order is raised, since the Chair has 
been lenient with those who seek to address the bill rather than the 
amendment, the Chair is going to continue to be lenient.
  Mr. GOODLING. Mr. Chairman, I understand this is coming out of my 
time, so I do not yield to any parliamentary inquiry if it is coming 
out of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is not coming out of the gentleman's time.
  The gentleman from California [Mr. Cunningham] is recognized for 4\1/
2\ minutes.
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. Mr. Chairman, I am not going to offer the next 
amendment, I would say to the gentleman, and I want to explain I had an 
amendment in the subcommittee. The illegal immigration, we cut out all 
23 programs. This deals with legal immigration. I felt that a person, 
once they sign up to become an American citizen, should have the rights 
of American citizens, because the process is often delayed.
  I have been told by the other side if I make a unanimous consent to 
have that improved it would be objected to. So I am not going to offer 
the amendment. It would go down.
  But the gentleman from California [Mr. Kim] and myself have some 
concerns and I would like to yield to the gentleman from California 
[Mr. Kim].
  Mr. KIM. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. I yield to the gentleman from California.
  Mr. KIM. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding. I presume 
the gentleman is yielding to me because he thinks I am a expert in this 
area. I am. Before I explain what my amendment will do, let me tell 
just a brief background story.
  Under this bill there is one provision which prohibits all of the 
benefits to noncitizens. Who are the noncitizens? It could be anyone; 
it could be refugees, could be anyone staying here temporarily.
  But my amendment is carefully crafted to those folks who are here 
legally and receive permanent residentship, those folks who came to 
this country in search of the American dream. Those folks took a long 
time to follow the legal process to come here and finally received a 
permanent residentship, and they are waiting for citizenship. 
Presumably they are soon going to be a citizen, they are citizens-
elect.
  Denying benefits to those folks, I can understand that. We are in a 
financial crisis with a $4 trillion deficit. I can understand that. 
Yes, we have to treat our citizens first before we deal with other 
noncitizens. I accept that.
  But let me tell my colleagues, once those folks who are permanent 
residents and waited 5 to 6
 years to finally apply for citizenship and that application is 
accepted, he or she should not be treated as a second-class citizen.
  All my amendment does is to treat them just like the citizens, and 
not denying all of the benefits to those folks.
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. If the gentleman will yield back, he and I would like 
to enter in a colloquy with the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Smith], the 
chairman of the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims, and I would ask 
if the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Smith] would agree to work with the 
gentleman from 
[[Page H3592]] California [Mr. Kim ] and myself in the committee to 
resolve the problem,to make an amendment in order so that we can deal 
with this issue? And it is bipartisan. We have the task force which is 
made up of Republicans and Democrats, and we will be happy to work with 
the gentleman on this issue [Mr. Kim] and myself, if the gentleman 
would make that in order.
  Mr. SMITH of Texas. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. I yield to the gentleman from Texas.
  Mr. SMITH of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I would like to reassure my friends 
from California, Mr. Cunningham and Mr. Kim, that if the amendment that 
they were planning to offer today is not accepted and if that amendment 
is offered in the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims, of which I am 
chairman, when we, in the next several months, are considering other 
comprehensive legislation regarding immigration, we will certainly 
consider their amendment. If that amendment is not approved on the 
subcommittee level, I will certainly work with them and guarantee them 
that I will ask that it be considered on the <strong>House</strong> floor.
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. I agree with this approach, and I think Mr. Kim does, 
too.
  I yield back to the gentleman from California [Mr. Kim].
  Mr. KIM. I thank the gentleman for giving me his assurance. And I 
agree with this approach, and I think my amendment will ensure all 
permanent residents and aliens would be legal at the time of the 
acceptance of the application, and I think that is an important message 
we have to send to those folks out there. I thank the gentleman.
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. I think this is one issue I think we can work very 
well with the leadership on the Democratic side as well as ours, and I 
yield back the balance of our time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The question is on the amendment offered by the 
gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema].
  The amendment was agreed to.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 18 printed 
in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.


                 Amendment Offered by Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Ms. Ros-Lehtinen: Page 157, after line 
     4, insert the following new paragraph:
       (6) Certain permanent resident and disabled aliens.--
     Subsection (a) shall not apply to an alien who--
       (A) has been lawfully admitted to the United States for 
     permanent residence; and
       (B) is unable because of physical or developmental 
     disability or mental impairment (including Alzheimer's 
     disease) to comply with the naturalization requirements of 
     section 312(a) of the Immigration and Naturalization Act.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentlewoman from Florida [Ms. 
Ros-Lehtinen] and a Member opposed will each control 10 minutes.
  Does the gentleman from Washington rise in opposition?


                         Parliamentary Inquiry
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary inquiry.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state it.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, are we now doing amendment No. 18?
  The CHAIRMAN. Amendment No. 18, that is correct.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. As printed in the Record?
  The CHAIRMAN. As printed in the Rules Committee report.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman I rise in opposition to the amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Texas [Mr. Archer] may control the 
10 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Florida, [Ms. Ros-
Lehtinen].
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, my amendment is a straightforward, simple humanitarian 
amendment, which would exempt any U.S. legal permanent residents who 
cannot take the naturalization exam because they suffer from mental 
disorders and physical impairments or disabilities.
  Under title IV of H.R. 4 these people would be cut off from Federal 
benefits simply because they are not American citizens. These 
individuals would not be able to resolve this problem because of their 
inability to take the naturalization exam.
  H.R. 4 currently makes no exemption for these individuals who would 
be the most affected by the elimination of these benefits. The elderly 
who suffer from Alzheimer's disease cannot possibly pass the 
citizenship exam given their debilitating disease. They cannot remember 
or memorize questions, nor are they physically able to present 
themselves many times before the citizenship examination.
  Under this legislation these people unfortunately would be unfairly 
cut off. The same goes for a person who because of a physical 
disability cannot leave his or her home to take the naturalization 
exam. These individuals, many of whom have contributed years of hard 
work and labor to this country, would now be denied benefits simply 
because they cannot because of physically tormenting disabilities take 
the citizenship exam. Under my amendment the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service will be able to have the ability to determine if 
the person is unfit to take the naturalization exam due to this serious 
disability.
  Mr. Speaker, in my south Florida community and indeed around our 
great Nation, many U.S. permanent residents, especially the elderly, 
suffering from such terrible diseases as Alzheimer's are unable to take 
the citizenship test because of their illnesses. This amendment would 
help these most vulnerable permanent residents, many of whom after 
years of hard work and making wonderful contributions to our great 
Nation rely on these benefits for their well-being.
  This humanitarian amendment would exempt those who are the most 
vulnerable by allowing them in a calculated and limited manner to not 
have to take the unfair exam that they are unable to take. This will 
allow them to not be cut from the benefits they need in order to 
survive.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I reluctantly rise in opposition to the amendment. I 
understand what the gentlewoman is trying to accomplish, and I am very 
sympathetic to her.
  Mr. Chairman, the problem is that the definition of disability or 
impairment is too broad, that like so many other areas where we have 
run into problems when we talk about disability within the welfare 
programs, we have found that it has been tremendously abused. We have 
tried to work with the gentlewoman for tightening up this language and 
have been unable to reach that conclusion at this time.
  However, I would say to the gentlewoman from Florida [Mrs. Ros-
Lehtinen], that if it is possible to get more precise language that is 
not so general in conference, I would be more than happy to consider 
that.
  There is the additional problem that CBO has not issued an estimate, 
a revenue estimate on this amendment. The rough understanding that we 
have been given because of the broadness of the definition is that it 
could cost $1 billion.
  So, I would, as I said, reluctantly urge the Members to oppose this 
amendment and give us an opportunity to try to work on the language in 
the conference committee.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the remarks of the chairman. We have in 
fact been working with the staff this afternoon to try to work up the 
language that specifically tracks section 312(a) of the Immigration an 
Naturalization Act, which already gives such waivers to those 
individuals who are suffering from disabilities.
  Our attempt is not to broaden that current waiver any more than it is 
already on the books. It is not to say that anyone who is a drug addict 
and anyone who is an alcoholic would not be exempt from taking the exam 
and would then be able to apply for benefits. That is not the intent, 
nor does 
[[Page H3593]] our language I think in any way allow that to happen.
  I think that the scourge has been unfair in the way they were 
calculating the effects, and in fact in our last discussion the 
calculations were that that scourge was going to come down considerably 
once they understood that section 312(a) already has similar language 
which exempts these individuals.
  This amendment merely puts it in this welfare reform package so that 
it is clear to the INS officials that these individuals are also going 
to be exempt from the citizenship requirement if their disabilities are 
such that it will render them unable, physically, mentally unable, to 
take the exam.
  We have an amendment already drawn up which would be acceptable, that 
we hope in conference would be accepted, to further specify that this 
is a very narrow limitation, and that the budget considerations are not 
as extreme as some would have us believe, and we are very confident 
that that is true because section 312(a) refers to naturalization.
  What we want to do is make sure that we have it refer now to the 
exemption from welfare benefits for those people who suffer from these 
debilitating diseases.
  Mr. SHAW. Mr. Chairman, will the gentlewoman yield?
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. I yield to the gentleman from Florida.
  Mr. SHAW. I know you have been working on this for sometime and you 
and I may have spoken with regard to the noncitizen portion of the 
bill, which I know gives you and a few other Members great concern. I 
would just like to echo the words of my chairman, the gentleman from 
Texas [Mr. Archer], in saying we will be working closely during the 
conference process, and hopefully this is something that we can work 
together on.
                              {time}  1215
  I see that our colleague from south Florida has also come onto the 
floor, who has expressed great concern with regard to this portion of 
the bill, and I can assure you that we will do everything we can to be 
cooperative during the conference process. I am sorry that we were 
unable to change the amendment by unanimous consent, but we did run it 
by the minority, and they were not inclined to allow the change at this 
point.
  So we will continue to work with you and the minority and the Senate 
in trying to resolve this problem.
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. I thank the gentleman. Yes, it is a shame; we had 
the language drawn up. I think it would have addressed the concerns 
that some individuals had about who specifically would be exempt from 
this exam.
  Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from California [Mr. Mineta].
  (Mr. MINETA asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. MINETA. Mr. Chairman, I really appreciate my colleague yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise today in strong support of the amendment offered 
by our colleagues from Florida--and in strong disappointment that it 
has to be offered.
  To me, it is absolutely reprehensible that this bill contains an 
attack on immigrants who were lawfully admitted to this country.
  As the Chair of the Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus, I 
can tell my colleagues that I have seldom seen an issue that has 
generated so much concern among the Asian Pacific American communities 
around the country.
  The rhetoric surrounding this issue has been frightening to many in 
our community--61 percent are immigrants who arrived in this country 
since 1970 alone.
  We began to fear where things were heading last year when Proposition 
187 was being debated in California.
  Asian Pacific Americans in California are second to none in our 
frustration with illegal immigration. Many in the community have waited 
patiently for years for spouses and children to join them through the 
legal process.
  But it quickly became clear to us that the rhetoric and the emotion 
went far beyond the issue of illegal immigration alone.
  Those who supported Proposition 187 told us repeatedly that legal 
immigrants had nothing to worry about.
  But sure enough, here we are today, debating on the floor of the 
<strong>House</strong> of Representatives whether taxpaying, lawfully admitted 
immigrants will be eligible for the services their taxes pay for.
  Many in our community, particularly those who arrived here fleeing 
Communist oppression and civil war, are frightened of where this will 
lead.
  Already, the rhetoric surrounding this issue has been filled with 
assertions that we should ``take care of Americans first.'' When did we 
change the definition of American? When did this happen?
  Mr. Chairman, my parents were born in Japan, but they chose to make 
America their home.
  I can tell you that never in the history of this country have there 
been two finer Americans. They chose America to build a future for 
their children. There is no decision they ever made for which I am more 
grateful.
  From Albert Einstein to Martina Navratilova; from An Wang, the 
founder of Wang computers, to Elie Wiesel, winner of the Nobel Peace 
Prize--all have come to this country and been accepted as Americans.
  H.R. 4 flies in the face of that principle, and to me it's a sad 
commentary on the state of national debate in this country.
  I urge my colleagues to join with me in opposing H.R. 4.
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to my colleague, 
the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Diaz-Balart], who is a cosponsor of 
this amendment.
  Mr. DIAZ-BALART. Mr. Chairman, I think that it is very important that 
I commend my colleague, the gentlewoman from Florida [Ms. Ros-
Lehtinen], for having introduced this amendment that I have 
cosponsored. It is very important that at the very least those who are 
physically or mentally disabled not be excludable from benefits even 
after being legally in this country because of their disability, and 
that is what this amendment, this very fine amendment, seeks to do.
  I am very disappointed that a ban on SSI and AFDC and food stamps and 
Medicaid remains in the legislation, in the bill, with regard to legal 
residents. I think that ban is unfair. I think it is unnecessary. I 
think there is somewhat of an element of irrationality involved because 
a great percentage of those who may be ineligible, because they are not 
citizens, will become citizens, so the savings will be minimal at best 
from the point of view of those who say this ban will save the 
Government money.
  So it is unfortunate it is in. We will continue fighting against the 
ban, against legal residents of the United States, from services and 
will continue working with the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Shaw] and 
the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Archer] and, of course, Members on the 
other side of the aisle to remedy this in the conference process.
  But this inclusion, the ban's inclusion in the bill, makes it 
imperative certainly that people that feel like I do, as strongly as I 
do, and I know the gentlewoman from Florida [Ms. Ros-Lehtinen] does on 
this issue, it is imperative that we oppose this legislation in its 
current form.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, as the designee of the gentleman from 
Florida [Mr. Gibbons], I move to strike the last word, and I ask 
unanimous consent to be allowed to yield blocks of time.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Washington?
  There was no objection.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman and Members of the <strong>House</strong>, this is another one of the 
fig-leaf amendments. Now, this place is starting to look like a fig 
tree. Every time they bring the bill out, people look at it and say, 
``Well, this needs a figleaf.''
  We took benefits away from legal immigrants in this country.
  Now, I went to the Committee on Rules and asked for the right to give 
those benefits to legal immigrants, and I was joined by the gentlewoman 
from Florida [Ms. Ros-Lehtinen] and the gentleman from Florida [Mr. 
Diaz- 
[[Page H3594]] Balart]. But the Rules Committee denied that. So we get 
this little figleaf that does not do anything.
  It knocks a half a million people off the aged and disabled rolls. It 
is a help for a few pitiful people who cannot walk into the office and 
file. Now, that, in my opinion, is about 1 inch when we ought to go a 
mile.
  If you are a legal immigrant in this country, you are working here, 
you are paying taxes, and bad times come to you, you ought to be 
entitled to everything else that every American is, and I think that 
this is only a half a loaf.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from California [Mr. 
Berman].
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from 
California [Mr. Berman].
  (Mr. BERMAN asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. BERMAN. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could get the attention of 
the manager of the bill for one moment, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. 
Archer]. I wanted to ask you to explain what I find to be one of the 
most astonishing features of this particular provision which the issue 
is raised by this amendment.
  The majority has decided to deny a series of very important benefit 
programs to legal, taxpaying resident immigrants in this country, and 
has made one exception, that foreign farm workers, guest workers, 
H(2)(a)'s, people who come here on a temporary basis, will remain and 
will be the only group of immigrants that will remain eligible for 
Medicaid, housing, SSI, AFDC, and all of these programs. So that while 
you have thousands of domestic farm workers, many of them here as legal 
immigrants who are paying taxes and are ineligible for these benefits 
and are among the lowest-paid workers in American society, the 
agribusiness lobbyists will be able to, and their clients will be able 
to, bring in foreign guest workers to harvest crops instead of using 
the available domestic farm worker supply and still be subsidized for 
the health care and the housing and other benefits for these workers.
  How could this bill contain such an exception to this provision?
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. BERMAN. I yield to the gentleman from Texas.
  Mr. ARCHER. Are you talking about farm workers?
  Mr. BERMAN. I am talking about foreign guest workers, farm workers, 
are the only group of immigrants left eligible for these benefits.
  Mr. ARCHER. If the gentleman will yield, I would respond by saying 
these people come into this country under very special circumstances, 
under special provisions in the law, are invited in here to help the 
economy----
  Mr. BERMAN. To work.
  Mr. ARCHER. Under those special provisions. The average immigrant who 
comes to this country agrees, on entry, not the guest workers, but the 
other resident immigrants legally admitted to this country agree, when 
coming in, to be self-supporting. The guest worker does not make that 
agreement.
  Mr. BERMAN. Reclaiming my time.
  Mr. ARCHER. The gentleman does not wish a response?
  Mr. BERMAN. I heard the response.
  Mr. ARCHER. The response is more lengthy than that. If the gentleman 
wants to cut me off, he may.
  Mr. BERMAN. The problem is I only have 3\1/2\ minutes. But I will 
yield as long as I have a little time to respond to your response.
  Mr. ARCHER. Well, on your time. The immigration law of this country 
provides that when you seek residency here as a legal alien that you 
are agreeing to support yourself. If you do not and you become a charge 
of the taxpayers of this country, you are subject to deportation 
legally under the law today. A guest worker comes under a very 
different circumstance into this country and is protected by the law 
that relates to guest workers, and the gentleman should understand 
this.
  Mr. BERMAN. I suggest a very different reason. I suggest that 
somewhere agribusiness stuck into this provision a bill to help 
subsidize the workers they want to import because they do not want to 
hire the domestic farm workers, and I find it just unbelievable that in 
a bill designed to encourage work you are helping to displace and 
subsidize foreign guest workers and displace American workers.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair would like to point out that he has tried to 
be lenient on Members who go over their allotted time. If we start 
abusing it, the Chair is going to charge it against the manager's time.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute, the remainder of my 
time, to the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Pastor].
  Mr. PASTOR. Mr. Chairman, I would ask my colleagues that, as they 
consider this amendment, they would think of legal immigrants not as 
someone who recently arrived, not someone who only came over to receive 
benefits, but to think of the legal immigrant as a person who has been 
here for many years, who has worked, has paid their taxes, has raised 
their family and has been responsible.
  The only thing that they do not have is the right to vote and are not 
citizens. But this amendment talks about a person who cannot take the 
examination, cannot be naturalized because they are physically or 
developmentally disabled or mentally impaired to take the test. So we 
are talking about a safety net for those legal immigrants who cannot 
take the exam because of their disabilities.
  I would think that Members of this <strong>House</strong> on both sides of the aisle 
would show compassion to these people and support this amendment.
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I yield 15 seconds to the gentleman 
from Texas [Mr. de la Garza].
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the amendment 
offered by the gentlewoman and hopefully, when we have more time, we 
will be able to address the underlying motives behind this issue in 
this legislation.
  I thank the gentlewoman.
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I yield 15 seconds to my colleague, 
the gentleman from New Jersey [Mr. Menendez].
  (Mr. MENENDEZ asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. MENENDEZ. Mr. Speaker, let me just say these people are the 
mothers and fathers, brothers, sisters, and sons and daughters of 
American citizens who came here and should not be denied. They work, 
they contribute, and they should not be denied simply because of their 
status when they have contributed all along, and at least in the 
gentlewoman's case, which I strongly support. We carve out a small 
exception to those people who should not simply be denied.
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I yield 15 seconds to the gentleman 
from California [Mr. Becerra].
  (Mr. BECERRA asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding a 
moment of time.
  I also support this amendment. I think she is trying to do the right 
thing. We should not be denying people who do their darndest to work 
hard in this country and do the best they can ultimately to become U.S. 
citizens. They should have that opportunity.
  I urge Members to support this amendment.
  Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the remainder of my 
time.
  Mr. Chairman, I hope the Members will support this humanitariian 
amendment to at least allow those individuals who are physically and 
mentally disabled to take their benefits that they deserve that they 
have worked hard to get.
  I hope we can see clearly through this anti-immigrant, anti-refugee 
feeling and get on with the real issue of helping those people 
regardless of their citizenship status.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, again, as I mentioned earlier, I understand what the 
gentlewoman from Florida is trying to do. I still have a great concern 
for the broader definition. I think that she actually believes the 
definition to be more constricted than it is.
  What came out of the Committee on rules is so broad in what can be a 
disability or a impairment that I believe we will find the very same 
things happen there that we have already found 
[[Page H3595]] under ``disability'' in other parts of the welfare code 
of this country today. I do not want to see that happen with national 
TV exposes down the line for abuses under this definition.
  I would hope that the members of this committee will vote this 
amendment down, that in conference we might have the opportunity to 
construct more constrictive language, but I would further say relative 
to this and any other amendments of this type, that the law of this 
land, the immigration law of this land, since the late 1800's, provides 
that anyone coming into this country as a legal alien understands that 
they cannot become a public ward.
  They cannot throw themselves into the hands of the taxpayers of this 
country, and if they do, if they go on welfare, they legally, today, 
can be deported.
  In addition, where they come in under the sponsorship of other 
relatives, those relatives take on the responsibility of maintaining 
and supporting their immigrating relatives into this country so that 
they will not become a burden on the taxpayers of this country.
  Mr. Chairman, my ancestors and most of our ancestors came to this 
country not with their hands out for welfare checks, even if they were 
willing to work, they came here for the opportunity for freedom and the 
opportunity to work and to achieve the successes that this country 
offers more than any other country in the world.
  Mr. VENTO. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the Ros-Lehtinen/Diaz-
Balart amendment to exempt legal permanent residents who cannot take 
the U.S. naturalization exam because of a physical or mental 
disability.
  Certainly the denial of benefits under this bill to legal noncitizens 
is unjust and unwarranted. This denial has nothing to do with sponsor 
support. In addition the measures to strengthen and extend deeming 
should be carefully considered.
  The policy in the GOP bill denies benefits to people who have legally 
been in the United States 5 years and have not achieved citizenship, 
even though they may have paid taxes and rent or maybe even own a home 
and have children, who are U.S. citizens. In St. Paul, MN, we have a 
significant settlement of Southeast Asians, the Hmong, who fled Laos 
after fighting along with United States troops against the Communist 
forces of North Vietnam. Because the Hmong did not have a written 
language, many adults have had great difficulty learning English. Under 
the provisions of the GOP measure before the <strong>House</strong>, they would be 
denied most benefits; $20 billion of the anticipated cuts made by this 
GOP bill come from just such limits.
  This amendment before the <strong>House</strong> would provide some modest relief to 
the harsh GOP bill which unfairly and arbitrarily discriminates against 
legal noncitizens. The circumstances in St. Paul, MN for the Hmong are 
extraordinary, but individuals who have not become citizens and remain 
in the United States generally are subject to unusual factors. Under 
what logic are they being denied benefits? I heard someone raise the 
notion of fraud and abuse but is there a demonstrated record of such a 
problem? Are legal noncitizens any different in this regard than 
citizens?
  The policy being advanced in this GOP measure is inappropriate and 
while I commend this amendment to my colleagues, the GOP bill is not 
much changed by this amendment. We do not even have an up or down vote 
on the subject of benefits for noncitizens due to the restrictive 
Republican rule and these piecemeal amendments will not remedy this 
punitive measure.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. All time has expired. The question is on the amendment 
offered by the gentlewoman from Florida [Ms. Ros-Lehtinen].
  The question was taken; and the Chairman announced that the ayes 
appeared to have it.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, further proceedings on the 
amendment offered by the gentlewoman from Florida [Ms. Ros-Lehtinen] 
will be postponed until after the disposition of amendment No. 20.
  It is now in order to consider amendment No. 19, printed in <strong>House</strong> 
Report 104-85.
  It is now in order to consider amendment No. 20, printed in Report 
104-85.


                     amendment offered by mr. moran
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I offer amendment No. 20, printed in <strong>House</strong> 
Report 104-85.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of amendment No. 20 is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mr. Moran: Page 170, after line 12, 
     insert the following new section:
     SEC. 442. PREFERENCE FOR FEDERAL HOUSING BENEFITS FOR 
                   FAMILIES PARTICIPATING IN WELFARE ASSISTANCE 
                   WORK PROGRAMS.
       Section 2 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 
     U.S.C. 1437) is amended--
       (1) by striking the section heading and inserting the 
     following new section heading:


        ``declaration of policy and preference for assistance'';
       (2) by inserting ``(a) Declaration of Policy.--'' after 
     ``Sec. 2''; and
       (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
       ``(b) Preference for Families Participating in Welfare 
     Assistance Work Programs.--
       ``(1) In general.--In selecting eligible families for 
     available dwelling units in public housing and for available 
     assistance under section 8, each public housing agency shall 
     give preference to any family
      who, at the time that such occupancy or assistance is 
     initially provided for the family--
       ``(A)(i) is participating in a work or job training program 
     that is a condition for the receipt of welfare or public 
     assistance benefits for which the family is otherwise 
     eligible, or (ii) is eligible for and has agreed to 
     participate in such a program as a condition for receipt of 
     such assistance; and
       ``(B) has agreed, as the Secretary shall require, to 
     maintain and complete such participation and to occupancy or 
     assistance subject to the limitations under paragraph (3).
       ``(2) Precedence over other federal and local 
     preferences.--Occupancy in public housing dwelling units and 
     assistance under section 8 shall be made available to 
     eligible families qualifying for the preference under 
     paragraph (1) before such occupancy or assistance is made 
     available pursuant to any preference under section 6(c)(4)(A) 
     or 8(d)(1)(A), respectively.
       ``(3) 5-year limitation on assistance.--Notwithstanding any 
     other provision of this Act, the occupancy of any family in 
     public housing or the provision of assistance under section 
     8, pursuant to the preference under paragraph (1), shall be 
     terminated upon the expiration of the 5-year period that 
     begins upon the initial provision of such occupancy or 
     assistance to the family.
       ``(4) Failure to participate.--If the applicable public 
     housing agency determines that any family who is provided 
     occupancy in public housing or assistance under section 8, 
     pursuant to the preference under paragraph (1), has ceased 
     participating in the program referred to in paragraph (1)(A) 
     before completion of the program or failed substantially to 
     comply with the requirements of the program, such cessation 
     or failure shall be considered adequate cause for the 
     termination of the tenancy or the assistance for the family 
     and the public housing agency shall immediately take action 
     to terminate the tenancy of such family in public housing or 
     the provision of assistance under section 8 on behalf of 
     family, as applicable.
       ``(5) Limitation on availability of preference.--The 
     preference under paragraph (1) shall not apply to any family 
     that includes a member who--
       ``(A) has occupied a public housing dwelling unit or 
     received assistance under section 8 as a member of a family 
     provided preference pursuant to paragraph (1), which 
     occupancy or assistance has been terminated pursuant to 
     paragraph (3), or (4); and
       ``(B) was personally required to participate in the program 
     referred to in paragraph (1)(A).''.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Virginia [Mr. 
Moran] will be recognized for 10 minutes, and a Member opposed will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  Is there a Member in opposition claiming the 10 minutes?
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I have not been informed of anyone opposed.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I am unaware of opposition, but I would 
like to control the 10 minutes.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran] will be 
recognized for 10 minutes and, without objection, the gentleman from 
Texas [Mr. Archer] will be recognized for 10 minutes.
  There was no objection.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Virginia [Mr. 
Moran].
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, what this amendment would do, depending upon whatever 
welfare bill is enacted--I happen to support the Deal amendment--but 
what this amendment would do is to say that when you enter a work 
program, then in fact you go to the top of the waiting list for public 
and publicly assisted housing, so there would be an 
[[Page H3596]] incentive for people who seek work to be able to enjoy 
the support of subsidized housing.
  Currently, there is very little turnover in any subsidized housing. 
In fact, there are 13 million people who are eligible for subsidized 
housing. And less than 3.5 million actually receive it.
  Mr. Chairman, the original intent of subsidized housing was that it 
be transitional, that people who needed some help to get their feet on 
the ground would be able to take advantage of subsidized housing in the 
interim until they achieved economic self-sufficiency.
  What this is doing is providing a significant incentive for people to 
find work, to get themselves on the ground, so to speak, and then after 
5 years they would lose their eligibility for this assisted housing.
  So that it will create some turnover in assisted housing as well.
  I would suggest to the Members they consider this with regard to 
welfare reform.
  I will bet that Members are not aware of this.
  Mr. PASTOR. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. MORAN. I yield to the gentleman from Arizona.
  Mr. PASTOR. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, I support the gentleman's amendment. I think what he 
wants to do is great because we need a little bit of assistance to the 
people getting off welfare.
  But with the rescissions and the new budget that is coming up and the 
budget for section 8 and the budget for public housing almost being 
destroyed, does the gentleman think it is really going to happen that 
you will be able to implement his amendment, knowing that the 
Republicans are going to destroy section 8 and public housing?
  Mr. MORAN. I would respond to my friend, the gentleman from Arizona 
[Mr. Pastor], the fact is this is a good amendment, regardless of what 
happens to section 8 or public housing. We cannot throw in the towel 
and ignore any improvements possible under the assumption that 
ultimately all housing subsidies programs are going to be eliminated. I 
do not think that is going to be the case.
  In fact, those programs that continue to exist, we have all the more 
reason to prioritize who gets the advantage of them. This does not 
affect elderly or disabled people, because families need more than one-
bedroom efficiencies, which is what is available to elderly and 
disabled.
  I think many people may not be aware of fact that in terms of 
eligibility for housing subsidies, AFDC is counted as income. When 
welfare reform passes and people who choose not to go into a work 
program lose their AFDC, the other part of the Federal Government, HUD, 
is going to make it up for them. HUD is going to reduce their cost of 
subsidized housing so that there will be a reverse, a perverse 
incentive, if you are in public housing, not to participate in the work 
participation program.
  Mr. VENTO. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. MORAN. I yield to the gentleman from Minnesota.
  Mr. VENTO. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, I too share some of the concerns raised by the 
gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Pastor] with regard to the gentleman's 
amendment. I note he suggests it does not explicitly, does not affect 
the elderly and disabled, but there is no explicit exclusion in the 
amendment that the gentleman is offering.
  Furthermore, as the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Pastor], our 
colleague, raised, the new proposals in terms of HUD, the reinvention 
blueprint actually asks to mix more people into housing. Of course, it 
normally leaves the preference decisions, with their long waiting 
lists, to the local control in many instances. This is contrary to 
that.
  Furthermore, I think if this were to--it needs some work, I am sure--
but it sets up a two-tier system for residents of public and assisted 
housing. It could displace many families currently on waiting lists or 
who are not enrolled in training programs, for a variety of reasons.
  The gentleman mentioned the obvious ones in terms of age or 
disability. But others who have been waiting who are not on training 
programs and who have been on the list for years could be displaced. If 
the gentleman would continue to yield, and I appreciate his doing so, 
it makes no exceptions for families who may lose their jobs or whose 
economic situation changed within a 5-year period.
  It makes no exceptions for families who go to work at jobs with wage 
levels that make them ineligible for housing.
  I know the gentleman's contention is if they receive the income, that 
they would not be so affected in terms of still not being impacted. We 
would like to keep those benefits in place.
  I think the intent of it is good. The effect of the amendment though, 
in terms of existing housing polices raises many questions.
  Mr. MORAN. I say in response to my friend, the gentleman from 
Minnesota [Mr. Vento], who has been very active in the housing area on 
the Subcommittee on Housing, it does not specifically exclude the 
elderly and disabled, but families looking for subsidized housing are 
not looking for one-bedroom efficiencies. They are not in competition 
with the elderly or disabled.
  I would also say to my friend that one of the biggest problems in 
terms of subsidized housing being used for the people in greatest need 
is that the only area that most jurisdictions are willing to provide 
subsidized housing is for the elderly and disabled because they make 
more profit. The developer makes more profit in building a high-rise. 
They do not like to provide subsidized housing for families. That is 
where the greatest need is; that is, those who compose most of the 
waiting list, families with children, not the elderly or disabled, 
because most jurisdictions are more than happy to provide for the 
elderly and disabled. They do not want families with kids. They assume 
they are unruly, with kids and so on, when they come from a family of 
poverty. That is our biggest problem in making the best use of the 
limited subsidized dollars that we have.
  But I would also suggest that those families that are on this waiting 
list, they ought to have an incentive to get a job, to pursue the 
ultimate objectives of welfare reform, which in fact both Democrats and 
Republicans agree is self-sufficiency. There ought to be an incentive. 
This is one of the most substantial incentives we can provide.
  If you go out and search for a job and find a job, we are going to 
provide subsidized housing for a limited period of time, 5 years, so 
you can get on your feet. This is consistent with both Republican and 
Democratic philosophy. It also would make much greater priority use of 
the limited subsidized housing funds we have available.
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. MORAN. Is the gentleman speaking in opposition?
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. Yes.
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, 10 minutes is reserved on the other side, 
none of which has been used as yet. I would suggest the gentleman seek 
time there.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from 
Pennsylvania [Mr. Walker].
  Mr. WALKER. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, what I wanted to talk about is more the general 
rhetoric that we have heard on the floor in the last few days about 
this bill.
  Mr. Chairman, I have been astounded and astonished to hear the harsh, 
unreal, and irresponsible talk coming from the Democrats about welfare 
reform. To do as they have done, call State and local governments cruel 
and heartless, is irresponsible. To do as the Democrats have done, call 
our neighbors and neighborhoods mean and insensitive, is harsh to the 
extreme.
  To do as the Democrats have done, refer to the work of our churches 
and charities as uncompassionate, is out of touch with reality.
  Mr. BAESLER. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary inquiry.
  The CHAIRMAN. Does the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Walker] yield 
for the purpose of a parliamentary inquiry?
  Mr. WALKER. I do not, Mr. Chairman.
  [[Page H3597]] The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman does not yield.
  Mr. WALKER. Oh, the Democratic opponents of welfare reform will say 
they have called none of those Americans these names. They claim to be 
attacking the Republican welfare reform bill or the Contract With 
America.
  But the underlying facts belie their caterwauling. We Republicans are 
not empowered by our welfare reform bill. The legislation turns power 
back to States and localities, to neighborhoods, to churches, and to 
charities. The only way that the results can be cruel and harsh, 
insensitive and mean, and uncompassionate is if you do not believe in 
the basic goodness of the American people and the American society. And 
the fact is--confirmed by this debate--the liberals do not believe in 
the basic goodness of the American people and American society.
  The Democrats long ago came to the conclusion that goodness and mercy 
flow through Federal bureaucrats. Opponents of welfare reform truly 
believe in taxing working people more so that they can have more money 
to spend on spreading good will through Washington solutions.
  That's why liberals are opposed to this legislation. It changes 
things. Democrats are in favor of keeping the present welfare system. 
They derive much of their political standing and power from the present 
welfare system. Their talk of meanness and insensitivity is status quo 
talk.
  The opponents of welfare reform have done everything they can for 40 
years to build the present system. It is the symbol of all they 
believe. They do not want to see it changed by a new majority.
  That is the real choice before us in the bill on this <strong>House</strong> floor.
  Do you agree with the present system that robs working people of the 
treasure of their work in order to support people who refuse to work?
  Do you believe the Food Stamp Program is the best way to feed the 
needy or are you disgusted to see food stamps abused as you walk 
through the grocery store check out line?
  Do you believe the School Lunch Program works well or are you 
disturbed to see the garbage truck haul away half the food, food the 
kids have thrown away?
  What the Democrats are defending with their harsh, unreal, and 
irresponsible talk are programs that are immoral and corrupt. It is 
immoral to take money from decent, middle-class Americans who work for 
everything they have and give it to people who think they are owed the 
money for doing nothing.
  It is immoral to run up our debt leaving our children and 
grandchildren to pay the costs of federally apportioned compassion.
  It is immoral to consign poor people to lives of living hell as 
government dependents so that politicians and bureaucrats can maintain 
power.
  It is corrupt to keep a system that is best known for its waste, 
fraud, and abuse.
  It is corrupt to give money to Federal bureaucrats that should be 
going to truly needy people and call the spending compassionate.
  It is corrupt to pick on the most vulnerable people in our society, 
the children and the poor, to maintain ones own political power base.
  Yet that is what this debate has revealed about the opponents of 
welfare reform. They cannot accept good welfare reform because it 
changes the pattern of power in America. The immoral and corrupt system 
they have fostered comes to an end. What the Democrats speak on this 
floor is the language of fear--fear of the future, fear of change, and 
fear of the loss of their political power. The system no matter how 
corrupt is their system and they want to keep it. The system no matter 
now immoral is their system and they want to keep it.
  What the rhetoric of the Democrats have spoken on this floor tells us 
is that anyone who wants the welfare system changed should support the 
welfare reform legislation that we have before us.
  Sixty years ago, Franklin Delano Roosevelt told us that all we had to 
fear was fear itself. Today, Democrats tell us clearly in this debate 
that all they have left is fear itself.
  Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. WALKER. Sure, I would be happy to yield to the gentleman.
  Mr. RANGEL. I thank the gentleman from Pennsylvania for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, is it not a fact that the Republicans are not driven to 
reform the system which Democrats want to reform too but they are 
driven in order to save the money in order to pay for this horrendous 
tax bill that you have introduced on the Contract With America?
  Mr. WALKER. The gentleman is absolutely wrong. What we are attempting 
to do is have economic growth and at the same time make certain we 
bring down the debt and deficit. It is corrupt and immoral what the 
Democrats are out here on the floor defending, I say to the gentleman 
from New York [Mr. Rangel].
  Defending this welfare system is actually corrupt and it is immoral.
  This system is absolutely one of the most corrupt and immoral 
systems, and it is about time we reform it.
  Mr. RANGEL. It is tax reduction, not welfare reform, and the 
gentleman knows it.
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from 
Kentucky [Mr. Baesler].
  Mr. BAESLER. Mr. Chairman, I would like to rise in support of the 
amendment offered by the gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran]. It does 
provide incentives, and I do think it recognizes the importance of work 
over those who do not work, and I hope we pass it.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, to extend debate, as Mr. Gibbons' 
designee, I move to strike the last word, and I ask unanimous consent 
to be allowed to yield blocks of time.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Washington?
  There was no objection.


                        Parliamentary Inquiries
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary inquiry of the Chair 
as to the effect of granting the last request.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state his parliamentary inquiry.
  Mr. MORAN. In other words, Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Kennedy] have a block of time to explain his 
position?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Washington [Mr. McDermott] will 
control 5 minutes and be able to yield it, and the gentleman has 1\1/2\ 
minutes remaining in his time.
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. I have a parliamentary inquiry, Mr. 
Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state his parliamentary inquiry.
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. Mr. Chairman, I am trying to 
understand. If we have a Democrat and a Republican that are both in 
favor of the amendment and we have a Democrat, a group of Democrats, 
that are opposed to the amendment, how has the Chair divided the time 
in aggregate?
  The CHAIRMAN. Ten minutes went to the proponent of the amendment, 10 
minutes to an opponent of the amendment----
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. The trouble is, Mr. Chairman, that the 
chairman of the committee is not opposed to the amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. He claimed the time by unanimous consent because no one 
else claimed it, and no one complained about it; no one objected to his 
unanimous-consent request, so the gentleman----
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. Did he ask for the unanimous-consent 
request, Mr. Chairman?
  The CHAIRMAN. Yes, he did, and the gentleman from Washington [Mr. 
McDermott], as the designee of the ranking minority member, has the 
privilege of striking the last word, and having 5 minutes, and 
controlling it, and he just did that under unanimous consent.
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. I understand.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Kennedy].
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. Mr. Chairman, I speak in strong 
opposition to this amendment, not for the intention that the gentleman 
from Virginia [Mr. Moran] has for offering it, but 
[[Page H3598]] rather for some of the bizarre and unanticipated results 
that I think will occur if the amendment were accepted.
  First of all, let us recognize that there in fact would be a 
disincentive to have families get into this program if the amendment 
offered by the gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran] goes through as it 
is currently written with a 5-year time limitation. Why would any 
family want to get into a program that is going to limit them to 5 
years in one of these housing programs when, if they do not go into the 
housing program under the 5-year provision, they would be able to stay 
in for a much longer period of time? This amendment only affects new 
section 8's that become available. There are very few new section 8's 
that are going to become available in this country in the next few 
years, particularly as a result of the budget process.
  Second, it seems to me that we already have a situation where we are 
creating preference after preference. We have preference for victims of 
AIDS. We have preference for elderly. We have preference for disabled. 
I say to my colleagues, If you're just a regular poor person in this 
country, you can't get on any section 8 voucher list that actually will 
get you a section 8.
  The fact is, in Massachusetts today, we have 17,000 people waiting on 
section 8. The only people that ever get a section 8 voucher are those 
at the very top who end up continuing to trade off between the special 
groups that have gotten these preferences, so it seems to me that what 
we ought to be doing is looking, as this housing committee is going to 
be doing in the next few weeks, not linking housing to the welfare 
debate, as this amendment unintentionally does, but let us review.
  President Clinton has provided a blueprint through Secretary Cisneros 
to have a complete revision of the housing programs. The Republicans 
have done the same. The gentleman from New York [Mr. Lazio] and I have 
an opportunity to look through these issues and get this issue resolved 
once and for all.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Frank].
  Mr. FRANK of Massachusetts. Mr. Chairman, I hope the amendment is 
defeated. We fall into an unfortunate pattern when we do things like 
this. We, outside the context of an overall consideration of a program, 
say this particular group is very worthy, and we give them a preference 
over everybody else, and Members vote on that thinking of the 
worthiness of the particular recipients of the preference. What they do 
not realize is that giving a preference to group A means giving a 
disadvantage to every other group.
  So I say to my colleagues, You're not voting now, if you vote on 
this, as to whether or not this particular group is worthy of a 
preference. The question is: Is every other group in need of housing 
unworthy? Should every other group be put down? In fact, you have 
people who are very poor. You have people who have been working and not 
quite making enough wages to make it in the private market. Both groups 
get disadvantaged by this. It simply falls into a pattern that we have 
fallen into before. You hinder the law with a set of preferences that 
are often inconsistent, that don't harmonize, that don't, in fact, 
represent a rational preference system because you simply say this one 
group, and this one group is all you can deal with here because we're 
dealing with welfare. So this says this one particular group will be 
deemed by us more worthy than everybody else, and this is not a basis 
on which we should be deciding who everybody else is.
  Mr. Chairman, I have served on the Housing Subcommittee, and I could 
not tell my colleagues who everybody else is, and I am sure other 
Members could not either. So the question is not whether we should do 
something for the people in this program. It is should we disadvantage 
everybody who is not in this program, should we decide that everybody 
not in this program is not worthy of getting housing or not worthy of a 
preference because, as the gentleman from Massachusetts pointed out 
saying, ``No, you get pushed down the list,'' meaning they do not get 
housing at all. I do not understand why we would say, without the 
ability to make comparisons, that we are going to single out one group 
to the inevitable disadvantage of every other.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may consume to the 
gentleman from New York [Mr. Lazio].
  Mr. LAZIO of New York. Mr. Chairman, I thank the distinguished 
chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means.
  Mr. Chairman, this is the where we are about to be introduced to the 
law of unintended consequences. I think that the gentleman from 
Virginia [Mr. Moran] has the most noble of intentions, and I share his 
concern in regard to the general preferences, but I want to outline two 
things.
  First of all, the area of preferences in, tenant preferences in 
particular, in housing will be addressed by the committee when we do 
the rewrite. It will be done in a very fundamental way, and it will be 
affecting many different people, many different groups, not just those 
people who are, say, victims of AIDS and the elderly, those people who 
have been dislocated as a result of Federal action. That will all be 
addressed in a more fundamental, more comprehensive, hopefully more 
thoughtful approach during the housing rewrite.
  I also would like to say that we are going to be involved in placing 
seniors and disabled people who do not have the ability to go out to 
work who are disproportionately on the waiting lists. They are going to 
be bumped as a result of this amendment if it is offered.
  So I would ask the gentleman if he would consider speaking with me 
and working with the committee to ensure that we target the area that 
he wants to target. I understand what he is trying to do, I think, and 
we would like to work with the gentleman in terms of addressing it in 
the housing bill. We think maybe he is dealing with some unintended 
consequences here in particular when it comes to single bedroom units 
and say that there are families interested in that. As a matter of 
fact, right now we are having families put in place in one bedroom 
units. Those are the same one bedroom units that the disabled, who 
cannot go out and work, or seniors who cannot go out and work, are 
seeking and are going to be bumped off the waiting lists, so I just 
simply ask the gentleman if he would consider possibly withdrawing it 
and working with me to ensure that we target the population that he is 
concerned with.
  Mr. VENTO. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. LAZIO of New York. I yield to the gentleman from Minnesota.
  Mr. VENTO. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from New York [Mr. 
Lazio] for his statement, and I think the same questions that he is 
raising are questions that are raised previously with the gentleman 
from Virginia [Mr. Moran], and the good intentions of the amendment has 
to be looked at. As my colleagues know, content without context is 
pretext, and we got a problem here in terms of how this all fits 
together in terms of what we are trying to accomplish, and I would hope 
that I think the suggestion of trying to either withdraw this or at 
least address the concerns raised with the gentleman from New York [Mr. 
Lazio], myself, the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Kennedy] and 
others, would be possible, and I hope the author would consider that.
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield 
just briefly?
  Mr. LAZIO of New York. I yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts.
  Mr. KENNEDY of Massachusetts. I just also want to make the point that 
one of the difficulties with this issue is the whole notion of a 5-year 
sunset on all housing. I think the sunset that the gentleman from 
Virginia [Mr. Moran] has written into this is a very different housing 
policy than we have ever had in this country, and I think to do this 
without having debate--as my colleagues know, I just found out about 
this amendment earlier today. I think this a very substantive change in 
our Nation's housing policy. It might make some sense under some 
circumstances, but let us have an opportunity to talk about it, to 
discuss it and to try to determine what the consequences are going to 
be. I want to just make sure that the gentleman from Virginia [Mr. 
Moran] understands that there are going to be tens of thousands of 
people that are getting section 8 vouchers today that will have to get 
over $11 an hour in order to pay for 30 percent of their income that 
would qualify them 
[[Page H3599]] for housing in the private marketplaces.
  So I say to my colleague, you're making a very big leap that somehow 
you're going to get from welfare to an $11 an hour job within 5 years. 
I don't know that we're going to be able to do that for the tens of 
thousands of people that could ultimately be affected as a result of 
this amendment. I think that it's well-intended, but I think it's 
shortsighted in terms of some of the perverse consequences that could 
result because of the way the amendment has been written.
  Mr. LAZIO of New York. Mr. Chairman, I just want to expound on that 
again, what the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Kennedy] is saying 
again and the gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran] I think again with 
the most noble of intentions, but we are talking about time limitations 
and upon the broad population, and I know this is not the intention, to 
possibly raise it in this context possibly some other time. We are 
dealing with people that do not have the ability to go out and go to 
work. The behavioral changes that we are seeking to adjust through 
welfare reform are not applicable when we talk about the disabled, the 
seniors.
  Mr. SABO. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. LAZIO of New York. I yield to the gentleman from Minnesota.
  Mr. SABO. Mr. Chairman, I would join in asking the gentleman from 
Virginia [Mr. Moran] to withdraw the amendment and let the committee 
work on it. I do not know what its impact on senior housing is, plus in 
our community we have a very unique project with Indian preference, and 
I think this amendment would override what has been very difficult 
negotiations.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Cleveland, OH [Mr. Stokes].
  Mr. STOKES. Mr. Chairman, I, too, would hope that the gentleman from 
Virginia [Mr. Moran] would consider withdrawing this amendment. I know 
he is well intentioned in this amendment, but it is really a bad 
amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, this amendment would impact every individual in public 
housing. Public housing recipients include the most vulnerable persons 
in this Nation, our elderly and children. There are nearly half a 
million elderly--predominantly single and disabled women--and almost a 
million and a half children living in public housing. The effects of 
the Moran amendment on their lives would most certainly be severe. 
Under this measure, participants in welfare-to-work programs have 
preference over all other eligible households. Thus, many of the 
elderly and children in families with nonable-bodied adults would be in 
jeopardy of having their assistance terminated.
  In addition, setting an arbitrary time limit on housing assistance is 
misguided and, while families receiving housing assistance should be 
encouraged, this amendment really discourages them from doing so.
  Mr. Chairman, I would hope the gentleman would withdraw his 
amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran] is recognized 
for the remaining 1\1/2\ minutes.
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, let me respond to my friends with whom I 
share many public policy objectives, but I would strongly disagree with 
the suggestion that we ought to stick with the status quo. Let me tell 
my colleagues about a family in Alexandria right across the bridge.
  Mr. Chairman, the mother whose husband left her 4 years ago is 
sleeping in an automobile. Her 6-year-old is with her in the back seat. 
The 4-year-old is in the front seat. They have been on the waiting list 
for 4 years. She has no hope of ever getting subsidized housing, and 
she is not unique.
                              {time}  1300
  Because subsidized housing goes to people who have contacts, and in 
many urban areas, as it is in the District of Columbia, it went to 
people who were willing to bribe housing officials. In most suburban 
jurisdictions, subsidized housing goes to the elderly and the disabled, 
because that is where the profit margin is for building high-rise 
apartment buildings, and they are no threat to the community.
  Families with children are in great need of subsidized housing today, 
and those families who are willing to participate in a work 
participation program ought to get some incentive and ought to get some 
support. There are 13 million families today who qualify for housing 
and people in housing have no incentive to leave it, and we have no 
regulation that requires them to leave it. They are in there for life.
  Mrs. LOWEY. Mr. Chairman, I rise today in opposition to this 
amendment that would grant preference for obtaining Federal housing 
assistance to families that participate in required State welfare work 
programs.
  While I share the goal of my colleague, the gentleman from Virginia--
to assure that working people are rewarded for playing by the rules, I 
have concerns about the unintended consequences of this amendment as 
drafted.
  By providing a housing preference for people participating in the 
State welfare work programs, this amendment will create a bias against 
women with young children. It should come as no surprise that when 
young children are involved, the primary caregiver often stays at 
home--especially when safe, affordable, child care is not available. If 
this amendment were to pass, those parents who are at home with their 
children for whatever reason--would be penalized--and could be denied 
of appropriate, affordable housing.
  Furthermore, in discussing this amendment with housing officials in 
my district, I have heard serious concerns that this amendment might 
undermine preferences which have been carefully developed. For example, 
some communities have given preference for section 8 housing for 
residents of their own communities. I do not want to see this <strong>House</strong> run 
roughshod over reasonable requirements that have often been in place 
for some time.
  While I know the intention of the amendment is to reward people who 
work, the unintended effect would be to penalize a parent who stays 
home with a young child. It could also damage perfectly appropriate 
locally established preferences. I urge my colleagues to vote ``no'' on 
this amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. All time has expired.
  The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from 
Virginia [Mr. Moran].
  The question was taken; and the Chairman announced that the noes 
appeared to have it.
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, further proceedings on the 
amendment offered by the gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran] will be 
postponed until after the vote on amendment No. 18.


                      announcement by the chairman
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, proceedings will now resume on 
those amendments on which further proceedings were postponed, in the 
following order: Amendment No. 18 offered by the gentlewoman from 
Florida [Ms. Ros-Lehtinen] and amendment No. 20, offered by the 
gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran].


                 amendment offered by ms. ros-lehtinen
  The CHAIRMAN. The pending business is the demand for a recorded vote 
on amendment No. 18 printed in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85 offered by the 
gentlewoman from Florida [Ms. Ros-Lehtinen] on which further 
proceedings were postponed and on which the ayes prevailed by voice 
vote.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I withdraw my demand for a recorded vote.
  The CHAIRMAN. The amendment stands as agreed to.
  So the amendment was agreed to.


                     amendment offered by mr. moran
  The CHAIRMAN. The pending business is the demand for a recorded vote 
on amendment No. 20 printed in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85 offered by the 
gentleman from Virginia [Mr. Moran] on which further proceedings were 
postponed and on which the noes prevailed by voice vote.
  The Clerk will redesignate the amendment.
  The Clerk redesignated the amendment.


                             recorded vote
  The CHAIRMAN. A recorded vote has been demanded.
  A recorded vote was ordered.
  The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were--ayes 35, 
noes 395, not voting 4, as follows:
                             [Roll No. 262]
                                AYES--35
     Baesler
     Baker (LA)
     Beilenson
     Brownback
     Bryant (TX)
     Condit
     Cooley
     Cramer
     Davis
     Deal
     Emerson
     Geren
     Gilman
     Green
     Hall (TX)
     [[Page H3600]] Hansen
     Hayes
     Klink
     Lincoln
     McCrery
     Montgomery
     Moran
     Myers
     Myrick
     Norwood
     Orton
     Parker
     Pastor
     Payne (VA)
     Pelosi
     Roth
     Souder
     Stenholm
     Tanner
     Thornton
                               NOES--395
     Abercrombie
     Ackerman
     Allard
     Andrews
     Archer
     Armey
     Bachus
     Baker (CA)
     Baldacci
     Ballenger
     Barcia
     Barr
     Barrett (NE)
     Barrett (WI)
     Bartlett
     Barton
     Bass
     Bateman
     Becerra
     Bentsen
     Bereuter
     Berman
     Bevill
     Bilbray
     Bilirakis
     Bishop
     Bliley
     Blute
     Boehlert
     Boehner
     Bonilla
     Bonior
     Bono
     Borski
     Boucher
     Brewster
     Browder
     Brown (CA)
     Brown (FL)
     Brown (OH)
     Bryant (TN)
     Bunn
     Bunning
     Burr
     Burton
     Buyer
     Callahan
     Calvert
     Camp
     Canady
     Cardin
     Castle
     Chabot
     Chambliss
     Chapman
     Chenoweth
     Christensen
     Chrysler
     Clayton
     Clement
     Clinger
     Clyburn
     Coble
     Coburn
     Coleman
     Collins (GA)
     Collins (IL)
     Collins (MI)
     Combest
     Conyers
     Costello
     Cox
     Coyne
     Crane
     Crapo
     Cremeans
     Cubin
     Cunningham
     Danner
     de la Garza
     DeFazio
     DeLauro
     DeLay
     Dellums
     Deutsch
     Diaz-Balart
     Dickey
     Dicks
     Dingell
     Dixon
     Doggett
     Dooley
     Doolittle
     Dornan
     Doyle
     Dreier
     Duncan
     Dunn
     Durbin
     Edwards
     Ehlers
     Ehrlich
     Engel
     English
     Ensign
     Eshoo
     Evans
     Everett
     Ewing
     Farr
     Fattah
     Fawell
     Fazio
     Fields (LA)
     Fields (TX)
     Filner
     Flake
     Flanagan
     Foglietta
     Foley
     Forbes
     Ford
     Fowler
     Fox
     Frank (MA)
     Franks (CT)
     Franks (NJ)
     Frelinghuysen
     Frisa
     Frost
     Funderburk
     Furse
     Gallegly
     Ganske
     Gejdenson
     Gekas
     Gephardt
     Gibbons
     Gilchrest
     Gillmor
     Gonzalez
     Goodlatte
     Goodling
     Gordon
     Goss
     Graham
     Greenwood
     Gunderson
     Gutierrez
     Gutknecht
     Hall (OH)
     Hamilton
     Hancock
     Harman
     Hastert
     Hastings (FL)
     Hastings (WA)
     Hayworth
     Hefley
     Hefner
     Heineman
     Herger
     Hilleary
     Hilliard
     Hinchey
     Hobson
     Hoekstra
     Hoke
     Holden
     Horn
     Hostettler
     Houghton
     Hoyer
     Hunter
     Hutchinson
     Hyde
     Inglis
     Istook
     Jackson-Lee
     Jacobs
     Jefferson
     Johnson (CT)
     Johnson (SD)
     Johnson, E. B.
     Johnson, Sam
     Johnston
     Jones
     Kanjorski
     Kaptur
     Kasich
     Kelly
     Kennedy (MA)
     Kennedy (RI)
     Kennelly
     Kildee
     Kim
     King
     Kingston
     Kleczka
     Klug
     Knollenberg
     Kolbe
     LaFalce
     LaHood
     Lantos
     Largent
     Latham
     LaTourette
     Laughlin
     Lazio
     Leach
     Levin
     Lewis (CA)
     Lewis (GA)
     Lewis (KY)
     Lightfoot
     Linder
     Lipinski
     Livingston
     LoBiondo
     Lofgren
     Longley
     Lowey
     Lucas
     Luther
     Maloney
     Manton
     Manzullo
     Markey
     Martinez
     Martini
     Mascara
     Matsui
     McCarthy
     McCollum
     McDade
     McDermott
     McHale
     McHugh
     McInnis
     McIntosh
     McKeon
     McKinney
     McNulty
     Meehan
     Meek
     Menendez
     Metcalf
     Meyers
     Mfume
     Mica
     Miller (CA)
     Miller (FL)
     Mineta
     Minge
     Mink
     Moakley
     Molinari
     Mollohan
     Moorhead
     Morella
     Murtha
     Nadler
     Neal
     Nethercutt
     Neumann
     Ney
     Nussle
     Oberstar
     Obey
     Olver
     Ortiz
     Owens
     Oxley
     Packard
     Pallone
     Paxon
     Payne (NJ)
     Peterson (FL)
     Peterson (MN)
     Petri
     Pickett
     Pombo
     Pomeroy
     Porter
     Portman
     Poshard
     Pryce
     Quillen
     Quinn
     Radanovich
     Rahall
     Ramstad
     Rangel
     Reed
     Regula
     Reynolds
     Richardson
     Riggs
     Rivers
     Roberts
     Roemer
     Rogers
     Rohrabacher
     Ros-Lehtinen
     Rose
     Roybal-Allard
     Royce
     Rush
     Sabo
     Sanders
     Sanford
     Sawyer
     Saxton
     Scarborough
     Schaefer
     Schiff
     Schroeder
     Schumer
     Scott
     Seastrand
     Sensenbrenner
     Serrano
     Shadegg
     Shaw
     Shays
     Shuster
     Sisisky
     Skaggs
     Skeen
     Skelton
     Slaughter
     Smith (MI)
     Smith (NJ)
     Smith (TX)
     Solomon
     Spence
     Spratt
     Stark
     Stearns
     Stockman
     Stokes
     Studds
     Stump
     Stupak
     Talent
     Tate
     Tauzin
     Taylor (MS)
     Taylor (NC)
     Tejeda
     Thomas
     Thompson
     Thornberry
     Thurman
     Tiahrt
     Torkildsen
     Torres
     Torricelli
     Towns
     Traficant
     Tucker
     Upton
     Velazquez
     Vento
     Visclosky
     Volkmer
     Vucanovich
     Waldholtz
     Walker
     Walsh
     Wamp
     Ward
     Waters
     Watt (NC)
     Watts (OK)
     Waxman
     Weldon (FL)
     Weldon (PA)
     Weller
     White
     Whitfield
     Wicker
     Williams
     Wilson
     Wise
     Wolf
     Woolsey
     Wyden
     Wynn
     Yates
     Young (AK)
     Young (FL)
     Zeliff
     Zimmer
                             NOT VOTING--4
     Clay
     Roukema
     Salmon
     Smith (WA)
  Messrs. ROBERTS, GOSS, and SMITH of Michigan, Mrs. FOWLER, and 
Messrs. FOLEY, MILLER of California, WICKER, and TIAHRT changed their 
vote from ``aye'' to ``no.''
  Mr. HANSEN changed his vote from ``no'' to ``aye.''
  So the amendment was rejected.
  The result of the vote was announced as above recorded.
                          personal explanation
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to say that I did miss 
rollcall No. 262. If I had been here, I would have voted ``no.''
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 21 printed 
in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.


                   amendment offered by mr. traficant
  Mr. TRAFICANT. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mr. Traficant: In section 7(i)(1)(B) 
     of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2016(i)), as added by 
     section 556 of the bill, insert ``, except that each 
     electronic benefit transfer card shall bear a photograph of 
     the members of the household to which such card is issued'' 
     before the period.
  The CHAIRMAN. Under the rule, the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant] 
will be recognized for 10 minutes, and a Member opposed will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  Is there a Member in opposition to the amendment?
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to the amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant].
  Mr. TRAFICANT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, we have a system right now with food stamps that has 
become street currency. Hard-earned taxpayers' dollars going to provide 
food and nutrition for programs will end up being trafficked on the 
streets of our cities in many cases.
  But as Members know, there are abuses not only on the street. 
Citibank has just moved to incorporate a photograph in their credit 
card. If you go to Sam's Club now, Sam's Club requires a photograph on 
that transaction card. All the States in the union now require a 
photograph on their driver's license.
  There was a time when individuals would take a driver's license and 
use a fraudulent driver's license in the wrong capacity. As a result, 
the States were moved to put that photograph on there.
  The Traficant amendment requires that if a State opts for the 
electronic benefit transfer system, they can use that money, but the 
Congress of the United States says, That card shall have a photograph 
of the head of the household.
  There has been some question if, in fact, my amendment would require 
everybody in the household to have a photograph. No, it would not. That 
would be up to the States and legislative history to date shall 
determine that.
  But the point is, many times you will see a police car at an 
intersection and the police officer does not have a radar gun on 
anybody. Maybe he or she may be doing their paperwork. People approach 
that intersection, see that police car, they take added caution.
  Everybody in this <strong>House</strong> is concerned about the limited dollars we 
have to apply to the needy people of our country. Let me say this, 
every dollar that can be saved by preventing abuse and fraud and the 
unintended purpose of the expenditures of these moneys is that much 
more for the people of our country who depend upon their food and 
nutrition from programs such as this.
  I am not going to use up all my time in the beginning on this. I am 
saddened to see there are some in the Department of Agriculture, 
bureaucrats that oppose it. Well, those bureaucrats could not commit 
Sam's Club not to do it. They could not commit Citibank not to do it. 
The private sector is starting to put those photographs in because in 
the final analysis, they are cost effective. They save money. They stop 
abuse.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself much time as I may consume.
  [[Page H3601]] Mr. Chairman, I rise in reluctant opposition to the 
gentleman's amendment. The gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant], as 
every Member knows, is the Buy American amendment champion of the <strong>House</strong> 
of Representatives and does yeoman work in that regard.
  I agree with the gentleman's intent of the amendment. And the 
gentleman does describe a real problem we have in the Food Stamp 
Program where approximately $3 billion in expenditures, as itemized by 
the inspector general of the Department of Agriculture, is going to 
fraud, abuse, and organized crime.
  We have stores in big cities that are not stores, they are just 
clearing houses in regard to using the Food Stamp Programs and the 
coupons as a second currency to bankroll organized crime.
  We have a strong antifraud provision in this bill. It is bipartisan. 
The distinguished ranking minority member, the gentleman from Texas 
[Mr. de la Garza], chairman emeritus of the <strong>House</strong> Committee on 
Agriculture, has contributed to that effort, and the administration has 
contributed to that effort.
  We asked the inspector general of the Department of Agriculture 
whether or not the amendment of the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. 
Traficant], from a practical standpoint, would be of help. I think from 
a perception standpoint there is no question that gentleman's amendment 
in terms of intent is very positive, but the amendment requires that 
the EBT cards contain a photograph of the family receiving food stamps.
  In the first place, we have a problem here with an unfunded mandate, 
since the States pay half the cost of the EBT, or that card. By this 
amendment, they would be required to pay additional amounts for a 
system that includes the photographs.
  In addition, in contacting the Inspector General, there is very 
little if any evidence, there is no evidence that having a photograph 
of the entire family of the EBT card will stop any kind of trafficking.
  In order to traffic in Food Stamp Programs with an EBT card, there 
must be a willing participant and a willing person in the grocery 
store. Having a photograph on that card will not deter the trafficking, 
because the grocery store person is a willing participant. That 
certainly would not stop the case. Without a willing partner in the 
grocery store, there would be no trafficking with the EBT cards.
  I want to make it clear that the EBT cards are instrumental in 
reducing the incidences of street trafficking of food stamps, but it 
does not eliminate the trafficking. However, EBT does provide a trail, 
so that law enforcement personnel can trace these violations, and then 
really prosecute all who violate the act.
  I would say to my colleagues, Mr. Chairman, that while I admire the 
gentleman's intent, and I admire the gentleman, the cost of placing a 
photograph of a family on the EBT card, while unknown, is unlikely to 
pay off. I think it is going to slow down our efforts to have States 
adopt a criteria to put in place the entire system is regard to EBT.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman 
from Missouri [Mr. Emerson], the distinguished chairman of the 
subcommittee in charge of food stamp reform.
  Mr. EMERSON. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding to me.
  Mr. Chairman, I, too rise in reluctant opposition to the amendment of 
the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant]. I wonder if he might consider 
withdrawing it, and for this reason. We do create here an unfunded 
mandate.
  The subsequent amendment is going to allow the States, if they wish, 
in pursuit of an EBT system to do what the gentleman wishes. I 
personally consider, I have been interested in the EBT approach to the 
management of our welfare system for a long time. I think it has very 
unique potential.
  I intend, as the chairman of the relevant subcommittee on the 
Committee on Agriculture, to hold early oversight hearings into this 
subject, and I would like to work with the gentleman from Ohio and 
cooperate with him in seeing that his concerns are addressed. I would 
simply like to explore the issue that the gentleman raises here before 
we lock ourselves into doing it, and I am willing to pledge to him my 
cooperation in pursuing this idea.
  There are a lot of aspects to EBT that in an oversight sense are 
going to need to be addressed. We will be back at the subject again in 
the farm bill, when that is before us in the committee in May. There 
are going to be opportunities this year to address the concerns of the 
gentleman from Ohio. I appreciate his interest and look forward to 
working with him as an ally in pursing the goals that he has in mind 
here.
  Mr. Chairman, I just think there is a better way to do it down the 
road.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for his 
contribution, and I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. TRAFICANT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Let me see if I understand this. The inspector general who has been 
responsible for a food stamp program that is the laughingstock of the 
free world is now going to advise us as to what is evidence and what 
may prove to be a system that would provide some preventive mechanisms 
from fraud and abuse?
  If the Congress of the United States, after the track record of food 
stamp programs, is going to accept advice of counsel, some bureaucrat 
in some office downtown who never had to cash a food stamp and does not 
know how important they are to the family, if we are going to follow 
their advice and counsel, we have made a great mistake.
  Second of all, let me say this. There is a lot of technology coming 
into play. The Coburn amendment adds to that. The Traficant amendment 
deals with the streets. People on the streets do not have computers, 
they do have fingerprint scans, but one thing they know: If there is a 
photograph on that card, and they do not have permission to have that 
card, and they are at any time apprehended with that card, they are 
subject to problems.
  I do not need evidence from the inspector general, who screwed up the 
food stamp program. If the food stamp program was OK, we would not have 
the EBT here being discussed on the floor.
  Citibank, Sam's Club, driver's license; when you go to vote on the 
Traficant amendment, look at your voting card. My God, are we worried 
about trafficking in voting cards? The truth of the matter is, the 
Congress of the United States is saying ``Look, you do not have to 
adopt an EBT system. If you do, there are block grants. Go ahead and 
implement it.'' However, the Congress of the United States is saying as 
an added safeguard, to make sure that money that we are putting into 
food and nutrition goes to the people who need it, the Congress is 
saying we want a picture on it.
  At Sam's Club they have a computerized system. You go in, they take 
your picture, and you get a computer printout card with a photograph on 
it. We are not reinventing the wheel here.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman from Colorado 
[Mr. McInnis].
  Mr. McINNIS. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for an opportunity 
to address this.
  I think the gentleman is absolutely right, Mr. Chairman. He used to 
be a sheriff. I used to be a police officer. Let me tell the Members, 
it makes a difference on the streets. I think the gentleman from Ohio 
brings up a good point, that hey, it may not thrill the inspector 
general, but when is the last time the inspector general rode out there 
in a squad unit or was out on the streets? It is going to make a 
difference.
  We have huge amounts of fraud going out there with food stamps. The 
food stamp program has lost its credibility across this country because 
of the fraud, and frankly, not only because of the fraud, but the 
failure of somebody to do something about the fraud.
  This is a very simple maneuver. It is not going to require a lot. It 
is not going to require big cost. It did not require us much to put 
that picture on our voting card. That is our picture. I can bet the 
Members money none of them are going to take this. This is a small 
crowd.
  [[Page H3602]] We know that out on the streets you get that picture, 
and it is like the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant] says, it is like 
an empty squad car. When we would go out for our coffee breaks we never 
parked our squad cars behind the building. We parked them right out on 
the street, because everybody coming up thought they were getting 
radared. It is the perception that counts.
  The perception will count in cutting down on food stamp program 
fraud. I stand in strong support of the amendment of the gentleman from 
Ohio [Mr. Traficant]. I think we have to move this argument to the 
street. What is the streets' perception?
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, it is always interesting to note in a debate when 
somebody starts to pillory another individual, when they do not know 
anything about the other individual.
  The new inspector general of the Department of Agriculture is Roger 
Viadero. He has been on board for 4 months. He is the gentleman who 
took the tape and provided the <strong>House</strong> Committee on Agriculture the first 
hearing on fraud and abuse in years and years and years. It was the 1st 
of February.
  Prior to 4 months ago, he spent a career in the FBI and as a street 
cop; street, street, I would tell the gentleman from Colorado [Mr. 
McInnis] and the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant], he was a street 
cop. He knows full well what will happen in regard to this particular 
effort.
  Let me remind the gentleman that an EBT card is not an ID card. I 
hope nobody around here is voting with an EBT card. It is not a 
driver's license. It is not a bank card. In addition to that, Mr. 
Chairman, in terms of the inspector general's advice, and he is in 
charge of it, he has indicated that it
 will not stop the trafficking that my colleagues hope would take 
place.
  If you have an EBT card and you cheat, you have to have a willing 
participant on the other side. It will take more time for States to 
meet the criteria of an EBT system to provide an audit trail to stop 
fraud if we put a picture on the EBT card.
  If we require it, it is an unfunded mandate. States will have to pay 
half of the cost. In addition, the gentleman's amendment is structured, 
and he cannot amend it, according to the rule, that the entire family 
has to be on the card. What do we do with a 10-member family, or 9 or 8 
or 7 or 6? The picture would have to be larger than the card.
  This does not serve any practical, useful purpose. It may send a 
message in terms of perception, but in terms of food stamp program 
reform and stopping crime and fraud, we should not use perception, we 
should use the best advice of a street cop, an FBI expert, and a 
gentleman who has come to the inspector general's office after it has 
been absent. The administration did not fill that position for the 
better part of 2 years.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. TRAFICANT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, if the Members will read the amendment, it stays ``The 
transfer card shall bear a photograph of the members of the household 
to which such card is issued.'' The States who enact that will make 
that determination. It does not necessarily mean they will have to have 
a photograph of everybody in that family. That is a misrepresentation.
  I commend the fine background of this new inspector general, but let 
me say this, anybody who says this photograph will not be a deterrent 
is either smoking dope or never did work on the street, because the 
gentleman himself has said in his comments that it would take a willing 
participant, a willing second party, and a willing second party knows 
that they are holding, now, a transfer card with someone else's picture 
on it.
  Mr. McINNIS. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. TRAFICANT. I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from Colorado.
  Mr. McINNIS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the gentleman, and I agree 
with the inspector general, whoever perpetrates the fraud walks into 
the store and has a willing participant on the other side of the 
counter. What we are talking about is before they walk into the store, 
there are people who will take that card with fraud intended, and with 
the photos on there, they are not going to go into the store.
  Of course it is going to have savings. Of course it will cut down on 
fraud.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, might I inquire of the Chair how much time 
we have remaining?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] has 1\1/2\ 
minutes remaining, and the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant] has 1\1/
2\ minutes remaining. The gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] has the 
privilege of closing.
  Mr. TRAFICANT. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the former 
sheriff, the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Holden].
  Mr. HOLDEN. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding time to 
me.
  First, I want to commend the gentleman from Missouri [Mr. Emerson] 
and the chairman, the gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts], for the work 
they did on this. I, too, have 14 spent years in law enforcement, 7 as 
a sheriff, and I support the amendment of the gentleman from Ohio.
  We have pictures on drivers licenses, we have pictures on ID's, to 
identify people for alcohol. It works as a deterrent. The first EBT 
project program in the whole country was in Reading, PA, in my 
district.
  I just hung up with the director of public welfare in Berks County, 
PA. They tell me this will work as an added deterrent to people trying 
to defraud the welfare system through EBT. I urge everyone to support 
this.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the distinguished 
gentleman from Missouri [Mr. Emerson].
  Mr. EMERSON. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding time to 
me.
  I simply want to point out we are a little into an apples and oranges 
argument here. The point of opposition that I have to the amendment of 
the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant] is that it is an unfunded 
mandate.
  A few weeks ago we passed an unfunded mandate bill and said States, 
we are not going to do this to you anymore. We are going to give you 
broad flexibility to figure things out. Here are the broad parameters 
of the program. Now, you devise it as best you can.
  The next amendment to be offered is one that allows States to pursue 
the gentleman's idea, but does not mandate it.
                              {time}  1345
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from 
Oklahoma [Mr. Largent].
  Mr. LARGENT. Mr. Chairman, I rise in opposition to this amendment as 
well.
  My opposition is simply based upon the fact that the subsequent 
amendment that we are going to be addressing introduced by the 
gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. Coburn], who has done extensive work on 
this, really yields the opportunity, as my colleague the gentleman from 
Missouri just said, to the States.
  If we are about anything in H.R. 4, it is about granting the 
authority and the power to make decisions like this back to the States 
where people really are on the street dealing with this issue.
  I urge a ``no'' vote on this amendment on the basis that it will be 
addressed later.
  Mr. TRAFICANT. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Ohio is recognized for 30 seconds.
  Mr. TRAFICANT. I am going to support the Coburn amendment, but 
remember this: The Coburn amendment does not say there has to be a 
photograph.
  The Traficant amendment says the Congress of the United States gives 
you the option of having this new system.
  But the Congress of the United States says you can opt to use that 
block grant money for it. But the Congress of the United States wants a 
photograph on that card, because the Congress of the United States 
wants to ensure that the limited dollars that we have go to the hungry 
children in the families that we are here trying to help with the 
limited moneys that we have. I appreciate your support.
  [[Page H3603]] Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance 
of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Kansas is recognized for 30 seconds.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Well, if we could lower our voice a little bit and 
indicate that Members who oppose the amendment are not smoking dope, it 
would be helpful. Maybe corn silk at one time but certainly not dope.
  I would hope the gentleman would withdraw the amendment, that we 
could deal with this in regards to the farm bill when we reauthorize 
the Food Stamp Program. That is the appropriate time. It is an unfunded 
mandate.
  The Inspector General of the Department of Agriculture who has done 
more to sift out fraud and point out the problem says from a perception 
standpoint maybe, from a practical effect no.
  Consequently, I would hope that Members would oppose the amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The question is on the amendment offered by the 
gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant].
  The question was taken; and the Chairman announced that the ayes 
appeared to have it.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, further proceedings on the 
amendment offered by the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant] will be 
postponed until after the debate on the amendment numbered 25.
  It is now in order to consider amendment No. 22 printed in <strong>House</strong> 
Report 104-85.


                    amendment offered by mr. coburn
  Mr. COBURN. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mr. COBURN:
       In section 556(a) of the bill, strike paragraph (2) and 
     insert the following:
       (2) in paragraph (2)--
       (A) by striking ``effective no later than April 1, 1992,'';
       (B) by striking ``the approval of'';
       (C) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``, in any 1 year,''; 
     and
       (D) by amending subparagraph (D) to read as follows:
       ``(D)(i) measures to maximize the security of such system 
     using the most recent technology available that the State 
     considers appropriate and cost-effective and which may 
     include (but is not limited to) personal identification 
     number (PIN), photographic identification on electronic 
     benefit transfer cards, and other measures to protect against 
     fraud and abuse; and
       ``(ii) effective not later than 2 years after the date of 
     the enactment of the Food Stamp Simplification and Reform Act 
     of 1995, measures that permit such system to differentiate 
     items of food that may be acquired with an allotment from 
     items of food that may not be acquired with an allotment.''; 
     and
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. 
Coburn] and a Member opposed will each control 10 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. Coburn].
  Mr. COBURN. Mr. Chairman I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  After listening to the discussion that we just had, I think it is 
important that we bear in mind that the objectives of the gentleman 
from Ohio and my objectives are the same. That is, to try to return 
integrity to the Food Stamp Program at the point at which food stamps 
are used.
  Several gentlemen have shown their congressional voting card here 
today that does have a photo ID on it. This amendment will allow that 
if a State so chooses to have a photo ID.
  The Food Stamp Program was established to provide a level of 
nutritional sustenance for people who cannot afford to feed themselves. 
Oftentimes this does not seem to be the case when we observe how food 
stamps are used.
  Everyone knows that the current system has loopholes that have 
allowed fraud, waste, and abuse to become rampant. Many States, 
including my home State of Oklahoma, are looking at electronic benefit 
transfer systems as an alternative way which have proven to be 
effective at saving administrative costs and cutting down on waste, 
fraud, and abuse.
  H.R. 4 encourages States to establish EBT systems for distributing 
food stamp benefits. For this reason I wholeheartedly agree.
  My amendment is intended to further help States make the transition 
to an EBT system while strengthening the ability of States to cut out 
the waste in the system.
  The first part of the amendment addresses a concern that many States 
have voiced in setting up an EBT system. Current law states that an EBT 
system must demonstrate lower administrative cost than paper coupons in 
any one year.
  Although costs have been shown to be considerably lower with EBT 
systems over time, the first-year cost may be higher in order to set up 
this new system.
  The amendment drops the ``any one year'' phrase to give States the 
flexibility to set up a system that works properly while still keeping 
administrative costs far lower than the current system.
  The second part of the amendment addresses one of the most common 
forms of food stamp abuse, their use by unauthorized persons.
  With paper coupons or even EBT cards, there is danger that someone 
could steal the benefits we have provided.
  There is also nothing to prevent a recipient from giving his coupons 
or EBT card to a noneligible person. We should ensure that the person 
to whom we have given the food stamp benefits is the only person who 
can use those benefits.
  The Traficant amendment addresses this in one fashion, although the 
State should be allowed to determine how best to achieve security in 
their system, whether it is a photo ID, a PIN number, a fingerprint or 
a retinal scan, all of which companies are readily available to 
provide. The State can determine how to do it. But the system must be 
secure.
  The most important part of the amendment, however, addresses the most 
visible problem people have with the current Food Stamp Program--people 
using food stamps for things other than food.
  I cannot tell you how many times I have had people in my district 
talk to me about the abuse of food stamps. The whole purpose of this 
program is to make sure food stamps are used for their intended 
purpose, for nutrition and support, and not for items other than that.
  Current law provides certain guidelines as to what can and cannot be 
provided. This system is intended to electronically and through 
computer technology force that into happening. It has a wide range of 
time on it, up to 2 years, and we will have a discussion about the 
benefits associated with this.
  I would urge all of my colleagues to vote for this amendment.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. COBURN. I yield to the gentleman from Kansas.
  Mr. ROBERTS. I thank the gentleman from Oklahoma for yielding. I 
thank him for his amendment. I would like to engage him in a colloquy 
if I might.
  There could be a situation here when States are able to define the 
food items that are eligible, that conceivably that could slow down the 
conversion by States to the EBT system.
  I know that that is not the outcome that the gentleman anticipates or 
wants and the body should understand that if it looks like this could 
occur, that the 2-year time frame can be extended to 5 years. I think 
the gentleman has stated this, but I wanted to make sure that that was 
the gentleman's intent.
  Mr. COBURN. That is my intent, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. ROBERTS. I thank the gentleman for his contribution, and I 
support the amendment.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. COBURN. I yield to the gentleman from Tennessee.
  Mr. FORD. To the author of the amendment, I want to support the 
amendment, but would the gentleman respond to a couple of questions if 
you do not mind?
  The electronic transfer benefit, would this apply to food stamps as 
well as the block grant cash benefits of the AFDC recipients as well?
  Mr. COBURN. This amendment does not address that, but it could be 
used in that fashion if a State wanted to use it. But it would be under 
a completely different set of circumstances. But this 
[[Page H3604]] amendment addresses only food stamp benefits.
  Mr. FORD. But this electronic transfer would be through some sort of 
card; is that correct?
  Mr. COBURN. That is correct.
  Mr. FORD. States are going on-line now with the electronic benefit 
transfer; is that correct?
  Mr. COBURN. That is correct.
  Mr. FORD. With the Personal Responsibility Act, we are talking about 
block-granting the cash benefit to AFDC recipients and then in most 
cases they are recipients of food stamps as well.
  With that, should we authorize or say to those States that the cash 
benefit should also be a part of this electronic card?
  Mr. COBURN. We have not tried to make that a focus of this amendment 
and that has not been addressed. We were specifically addressing food 
stamps because of the significant amount of fraud that is seen and used 
with food stamps, both on the black market, the use of purchasing even 
cars or drugs.
  The whole goal of the amendment is to eliminate the fraud in the Food 
Stamp Program and not address the other issues, although it is entirely 
possible that it could be used in that manner.
  Mr. FORD. We just want to make sure that we can also look at this 
information superhighway, that we make sure that the cost savings that 
might be involved with the cash benefits. Now that we are only 
allocating the 1994 level under the formula of $15.4 billion, we want 
to make sure that States can also have savings here, that they will not 
have to mail out a check monthly to the AFDC recipients.
  Mr. COBURN. Reclaiming my time, that is entirely possible with this 
system and States could do that.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman from Arizona 
[Mr. Shadegg].
  Mr. SHADEGG. Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of the amendment 
offered by my colleague the gentleman from Oklahoma.
  The Coburn amendment makes very modest changes to this legislation 
which will do a tremendous amount to solve the real threat to the 
credibility of the Food Stamp Program which is posed by fraud, waste, 
and abuse. Beyond that, it will save taxpayers dollars. We have to all 
be about that task.
  The electronic benefit transfer cards save money over the current 
paper food stamps. Distributing food stamps by this method will also 
enable us to eliminate a great deal of the fraud.
  There is indeed, today, a regrettable amount of black market in food 
stamps. Hundreds of millions of dollars of our taxpayers' money are 
going to be used right now not for food for the hungry but to buy drugs 
from black-marketed stamps and to buy beer and drugs that do not help 
the families who are supposed to be benefited. This program will give 
us an opportunity to stop that kind of fraud and abuse. But more 
importantly, it will let the States decide.
  In the debate we just heard on the Traficant amendment, we saw the 
mentality of Washington, DC, that for too long, we, in the Congress, 
know the answer. Certainly a photograph is a right step in the 
direction of stopping fraud. But there are other mechanisms. There are 
retina testers, there are thumb-print screeners. There are lots of 
different devices. Technology moves faster than the U.S. Congress.
  What the Coburn amendment does is it said, we don't have all that 
wisdom here. We should let the States, charged with the responsibility 
of administering this program, make those decisions.
  I urge my colleagues to support the Coburn amendment.
  Mr. COBURN. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Florida [Mr. Foley].
  Mr. FOLEY. I want to commend my colleague on this very good 
amendment.
  We have talked about it a lot in Florida and we have talked about it 
in other States. In fact, Maryland is going quickly to the EBT system. 
This amendment gives the States the flexibility to implement what I 
think is the most important aspect of reform in the Food Stamp Program; 
$1.8 billion has been shown to be wasted at least in the Food Stamp 
Program. This very good amendment will now strike some of that and 
bring the dollars to truly benefit the needy of our communities.
  The Republican Party is about feeding the poor. We want to make 
certain they get basic nutrition.
  This bill also provides that we can exclude cigarettes, alcohol, and 
hopefully ice cream, hopefully popcorn, hopefully junk foods that are 
taking our precious tax dollars and giving people food that is not 
nutritious in value.
  I strongly support the Coburn amendment. I urge my colleagues to do 
the same.
  Mr. COBURN. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. Coburn] is recognized 
for 1 minute.
  Mr. COBURN. Mr. Chairman, I urge my colleagues to support the 
amendment.
  If there is an emotional issue, it is that the money that we spend to 
help those who need it should go for what we intend it to do. This 
amendment goes very far in that regard.
  I would urge all to support this amendment.
  Mr. GIBBONS. Mr. Chairman, to extend the debate, I move to strike the 
last word, and I yield to the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford].
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, let me try a couple of questions to the 
author of the amendment.
  The way I read your amendment is that you require the States which 
would mean that this would be a mandate on the States to put in place. 
I am not opposed to your amendment at all. I am just trying to make 
sure that we clearly understand that we would require the States to do 
this which would mean that this would be a mandate; is that correct?
  Mr. COBURN. If the gentleman will yield, what we are requiring is the 
States to be responsible for how they spend the money in terms of using 
the available technology that is available to them at any one period of 
time. It is our intention, and if you will see in the rest of the bill, 
that there is no mandate on States other than having the call. They can 
use any one they want, the cheapest one or the most expensive.
  The most expensive happens to be retinal images presently. If they 
want to use that, they can. They are just required if they want to have 
block-granted food stamps that within a 2-year period, if the 
technology is available, which we think it will be, that they are going 
to use a system that secures it for the very purpose that the food 
stamp was intended for, that supplement.
  Mr. FORD. I think it is a good amendment. I guess an amendment to 
your amendment would not be in order under the rule of the <strong>House</strong> today, 
but if this bill does go to the Senate in conference, hopefully the 
provision with the electronic transfer would be part of the cash 
benefit for the AFDC recipients as well that would be included at some 
point.
  Mr. COBURN. I would very much agree with the gentleman on that. I 
think that is a good way to make sure those benefits are intended and 
spent, and intended in a direction. They cannot be spent on things we 
would not want, our support dollars going to support.
  That is not part of this amendment and I think it is a wonderful 
suggestion. If the gentleman would bring that up when we do go to 
conference, we could do that.
  Mr. FORD. Before I yield to my other colleagues, let me say that it 
is very clear that this is an area that we need to look at, the 
electronic on-line system with food stamps as well as AFDC.
  Fraud, waste, and abuse is something we all are in opposition to and 
we want to do everything possible to cut it out, but we certainly do 
not want to confuse it with the vast majority of these recipients and 
try to suggest for one minute that people who are trying to make ends 
meet and to feed their children every day, and it is difficult for food 
stamps and other benefits to carry them through the month, that we want 
to lump everybody into some type of waste, fraud, and abuse situation. 
That is not the case. Those who are doing it, we want to stop it 
certainly, but we want to stop it immediately.
  [[Page H3605]] Mr. HEFNER. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. FORD. I yield to the gentleman from North Carolina.
  Mr. HEFNER. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding, and I 
agree with the gentleman's amendment. But make no mistake about it, 
this is not going to get to the problem of the people that do the 
massive abuses in automobiles and traffic in this. I say to the 
gentleman from Kansas City, you have to have a willing counterpart to 
engage in this, and I think what you have to do is go even further than 
this and get some real strong restrictions from the inspector general 
to get to the root because of the people that are ripping off the food 
stamp program. It is not the little old lady trying to get by and feed 
her children that is ripping off the food stamp program. And as noble 
as this is, you are not going to solve the big problems of ripping off 
the hundreds of millions of dollars until you get to some real strict 
enforcement like the gentleman from Kansas is talking about.
  Mr. COBURN. Mr. Chairman, if the gentleman will yield, I would just 
remind the gentleman 10 days ago using the system in Houston, several 
gentleman were found through the use of the EBT securities system and 
will be making restitution of some $300,000 to $500,000 because we can 
now with the EBT system track for fraud and individual abusers. And the 
technology is there. There is technology to eliminate this fraud and 
abuse, even to eliminate willing providers because the computer chip 
will be hard to beat.
  Mr. HEFNER. Good for them.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield the remainder of the time to the 
gentleman from Texas [Mr. de la Garza], who serves on the Committee on 
Agriculture.
  Mr. de la Garza. I thank the gentleman for yielding the time, and 
thank our colleague, the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Gibbons].
  Let me say everyone is in favor of cutting fraud and waste and abuse, 
and saving money. There is not problem in that. How we address it is 
part of the problem.
  And I basically am in accord with what the gentleman is attempting to 
do.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman's time has expired. All time has expired.
  The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from 
Oklahoma [Mr. Coburn].
  The amendment was agreed to.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 24 printed 
in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.


                     amendment offered by mr. upton
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment No. 24 offered by Mr. Upton: At the end of 
     subtitle B of title V, insert the following (and make such 
     technical and conforming changes as may be appropriate):
     SEC. 581. DISQUALIFICATION RELATING OF CHILD SUPPORT ARREARS.
       Section 6 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2015) is 
     amended by adding at the end the following:
       ``(i) No individual is eligible to participate in the food 
     stamp program as a member of any household during any period 
     such individual has any unpaid liability under a court order 
     for the support of a child of such individual.''.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. 
Upton] will be recognized for 10 minutes, and a Member opposed will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  Does any Member seek control of the time in opposition?
  The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Upton].


              amendment, as modified, offered by mr. upton
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent for a very small 
modification in the amendment which, as I understand, the ranking 
member of the committee has agreed to.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will report the amendment, as modified.
  The Clerk read as follows:
       Amendment No. 24, as modified, offered by Mr. Upton: At the 
     end of subtitle B of title V, insert the following (and make 
     such technical and conforming changes as may be appropriate):
     SEC. 581. DISQUALIFICATION RELATING OF CHILD SUPPORT ARREARS.
       Section 6 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2015) is 
     amended by adding at the end the following:
       ``(i) No individual is eligible to participate in the food 
     stamp program as a member of any household during any period 
     such individual has any unpaid liability that is both--
       ``(1) under a court order for the support of a child of 
     such individual; and
       ``(2) for which the court is not allowing such individual 
     to delay payment.''.
  Mr. UPTON (during the reading). Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent 
that the amendment, as modified, be considered as read and printed in 
the Record.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Michigan?
  There was no objection.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the modification?
  There was no objection.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Upton] is recognized 
for 10 minutes.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I am very encouraged by the child support enforcement 
provisions that are part of this welfare reform bill. But we need to do 
more.
  I have spent considerable time with a number of 14- and 15-year-old 
mothers who face a very hard life juggling school work, work and the 
demands of parenthood as well. Many of us take that responsibility very 
seriously, as we live for our kids and we want them to have a better 
life, and we are taken aback by parents who shirk this responsibility 
and refuse to make even a modest payment to help support their child. 
The result is that both the child and the attending parent suffer and 
are penalized.
  This amendment will no longer reward parents who fail to fulfill 
their obligations to pay child support but continue to receive 
Government assistance through the Food Stamp Program.
  Today there is $34 billion in unpaid child support due to more than 
23 million children. More specifically, more than 30 percent of women 
with kids in poverty receive no child support whatsoever.
  A survey of income and program participation found that of the 
525,000 noncustodial parents receiving food stamps, 79 percent or 
415,000 were not paying child support.
  It is time to stop the free lunch. We are asking custodial single 
parents, who happen to be primarily mothers, to cover a lot of bases 
and carry the load, but what about the other parent? Where is the 
equity? We cannot forget that parenting is the responsibility of two 
people, and we certainly cannot forget the children who are in 
desperate need of assistance.
  If this amendment passes, I fully intend to work to ensure that this 
amendment targets those who are dodging their parental 
responsibilities, not those who are making an honest effort to care for 
their child.
  Mr. Chairman, we cannot continue to support deadbeat parents, and I 
urge Members to vote ``yes'' on this amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from New Jersey [Mr. 
Martini].
  Mr. MARTINI. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding the 
time, and I congratulate him for the fine effort on this amendment.
  To me, this amendment is a clear statement of right and wrong.
  If there is one overriding message in our overhaul of the welfare 
system, it is that we as a government and as members of a compassionate 
society demand that all of us act as responsible citizens.
  Well, as most of my colleagues know, parenthood demands 
responsibility.
  Any person who brings a child into this world and then refuses to do 
everything in his or her power to ensure that child's well-being 
deserves punishment, not the taxpayers' generosity.
  In Maine, it has been the case that the very threat of such sanctions 
as license forfeiture has produced a huge increase in the amount of 
child support that state has collected.
  I would expect that the very threat of withholding food stamps from 
deadbeat parents would do the same.
  I once again commend the gentleman from Michigan for his excellent 
idea, and urge my colleagues to support this measure.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman 
from 
 [[Page H3606]] Texas [Mr. de la Garza], former chairman and now 
ranking member of the committee.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding the 
time, and I appreciate his interest and his effort. All of us are of 
course in favor of reducing fraud, waste and abuse, and certainly this 
is an area of very strong interest to us.
  What I would like to ask of the gentleman is that there is concern 
that there needs to be further refinement of his amendment. Am I 
correct in that?
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. de la GARZA. I yield to the gentleman from Michigan.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding back. I 
would like to say I want to work very closely with the chairman and 
others on his side, as well as our side, to make sure that the intent 
of this legislation, or that the actual language follows the intent.
  In some cases, of course, an individual not making child support 
payments may be doing so in conjunction with the court, and those we do 
not want to penalize. We want to make sure those individuals who are in 
fact in arrears at the subjugation, I guess, of the courts, are in fact 
those who are penalized. This language does not permit that.
  I would like to work with the gentleman and others as the bill moves 
forward to make sure we get the best language available.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, we appreciate that. We support the 
gentleman's intent and motive, and hopefully we will be able to craft 
it in an appropriate manner so it can address effectively the intent. 
And I thank the gentleman.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Kansas [Mr. Roberts].
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding time to 
me. I will not take the 2 minutes.
  As indicated, the gentleman's amendment does require that no person 
can receive food stamps if that person is required by a court order to 
pay child support, and then dealt with the unpaid liability issue. The 
gentleman has amended his amendment so that becomes more flexible and 
certainly more practical.
  Let me seek the gentleman's assurance that the effective date of this 
amendment will coincide with the implementation of the new child 
support enforcement system as described in H.R. 4.
  Mr. UPTON. I accept that.
  Mr. ROBERTS. I support the gentleman's amendment and I thank him for 
his contribution.
  Mr. GIBBONS. Mr. Chairman, in order to extend the time of debate, I 
move to strike the last word.
  The CHAIRMAN. Does the gentleman wish to control the 5 minutes?
  Mr. GIBBONS. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent, if the occasion 
arises, that I be allowed to allocate blocks of time to Members.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Florida?
  There was no objection.
  Mr. GIBBONS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, this is about the most tepid debate I have seen around 
here in years, and I think it is really by design.
  Yesterday it was obvious that the Republicans wanted to move this 
bill quickly through the <strong>House</strong> without anybody really seeing what was 
in it and what it really did. But they have succeeded in cutting off 
all of the really spirited debate by what they have done here.
  I wish the cameras would please pan the floor. I think there are 12 
Members, maybe 13. Two just came in. Fourteen Members here on this 
debate, 14 Members out of 435 Members on this debate on the most 
important piece of legislation that will come before this body, a piece 
of legislation that takes about $70 billion from poor children to use 
in the crown jewel of the contract to give tax cuts that are not needed 
to people who do not deserve them.
  There are 12 or 14 of us here. And the Committee on Rules I think did 
this deliberately. The amendments we have had have been nothing 
amendments. I do not impugn anybody's integrity about them, but they 
have just been nothing amendments. We have not even called for 
rollcalls on any of them. They do nothing. They could have been done by 
unanimous consent.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. GIBBONS. No, I am not going to yield. But why did the Committee 
on Rules do that?
  I have the floor and I would like to continue using it. If I have any 
time left over, I may yield it to you, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Florida has the time.
  Mr. GIBBONS. Mr. Chairman, the Committee on Rules had 164 requests 
for amendments up there. They granted 31 amendments, 5 of which came 
from the Democrats, and 2 of our amendments they stole from us and gave 
to the Republicans because they sounded so good that they could not 
resist that. I have a list of 13 really important amendments here that 
they turned down and would not even let be debated here, and yet there 
are 12 or 14 of us here on the floor to carry on this nothing debate 
today.
  The Committee on Rules did not allow the Stenholm amendment to 
restrict the 70 billion dollars' worth of savings here to budget 
deficit reduction and not to spend it on tax cuts. They did not allow 
another 12 amendments, all sponsored by Democrats, that were good, 
substantive amendments, that were controversial. They put in all of 
these nothing amendments that we have had here all day.
  You know, I do not blame the Republicans for wanting to duck this 
bill. I know they are embarrassed that they had to bring this dog to 
the floor. But that is the only way they could raise a part of the 
money so they can give it back to tax cuts that the Nation itself does 
not need, tax cuts that come at the wrong time in the American economic 
history.
  America is at full employment right now. America is at maximum 
factory capacity utilization right now. The American dollar is unstable 
because the world currency traders are betting we do not have the guts 
to balance or reduce our budget deficit.
  And so we come into this debate today on these nothing amendments so 
that people will be bored to death and so that 10 or 12 of us here will 
be here to take part in it. It is a travesty. It is a travesty that the 
time of Congress is wasted on what we have here before us today. It was 
deliberately done to bore the audience to death and the Members to 
death so that they would have no opportunity to make any important 
decisions.
  The Committee on Rules did not allow the Matsui-Kennedy amendment.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman from 
Michigan [Mr. Smith].
  Mr. SMITH of Michigan. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the gentleman 
yielding.
  And I want to say good job to the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. 
Upton], good amendment.
  You know, the breakdown of the family is a national tragedy, and when 
we do have time to discuss the amendments, let us discuss what is 
happening.
  This is another notch. This is another foot forward in trying to 
control irresponsibility of parents that forsake their kids.
  I just want to, in the U.S. News, read a couple of quotes out of it. 
It says:
       More than virtually any other factor, a biological father's 
     presence in the family will determine the child's success and 
     happiness.
       Rich or poor, white or black, the children of divorce and 
     those born outside of marriage struggle through life at a 
     measurable disadvantage. The absence of fathers is linked to 
     the most social nightmares from boys with guns to girls with 
     babies.
  This is a step forward. We have the ability within H.R. 4 to identify 
these individuals. It is reasonable that we do not reward the 
individuals that have forsaken their responsibilities for their kids by 
giving them additional Federal handouts.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to my friend, the 
gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts].
  Mr. ROBERTS. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Ah, memories are made of this. It was just the other day when the 
gentleman from Florida was requesting of 
 [[Page H3607]] the <strong>House</strong> in decibels a little higher than the ones he 
just used everybody to sit down and cease and desist, let us have a 
rational debate.
  I would suggest that the amendments that we are considering are not 
nothing amendments. I would suggest the policy debate we had in the 
<strong>House</strong> Agriculture Committee that went 15 hours did not involve nothing. 
It involved tremendous policy decision in regards to food stamp reform.
  Might I remind the gentleman from Florida that in October 1987 the 
Democrats first attempted to self-execute the adoption of their welfare 
reform bill into the reconciliation bill without a separate vote. The 
adoption of the rule was considered to be the adoption of the welfare 
reform amendment. That rule was rejected by the <strong>House</strong>. A second 
legislative day was created that same day by Speaker Wright. Memories 
are made of this.
  And we brought forward a new rule for reconciliation minus the 
welfare reform component. The Committee on Rules subsequently reported 
a separate rule for the welfare reform bill making in order just one 
amendment, one amendment, not a series of amendments or nothing 
amendments that we are talking about here, in the nature of a 
substitute by the minority leader, but that rule was withdrawn from 
lack of support by the Democrats.
  Finally we had a third rule.
  The CHAIRMAN. The time of the gentleman from Kansas has expired.
                         Parliamentary inquiry
  Mr. TAYLOR of Mississippi. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary 
inquiry.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state his parliamentary inquiry.
  Mr. TAYLOR of Mississippi. At what point can I be recognized to offer 
an amendment so that whatever savings come from this bill, possibly $70 
billion, would be dedicated for deficit reduction?
  Mr. ROBERTS. Regular order, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. TAYLOR of Mississippi. I am making a parliamentary inquiry, sir.
  The CHAIRMAN. The rule does not allow amendments to these amendments.
  Mr. TAYLOR of Mississippi. How did that happen, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is in the rule.
  Mr. TAYLOR of Mississippi. And a majority of Members voted to keep a 
Member from offering an amendment so that the savings from this bill 
could be placed towards deficit reduction?
  Mr. ROBERTS. Regular order.
  The CHAIRMAN. When the <strong>House</strong> adopted <strong>House</strong> Resolution 119, the rule 
governing this debate, the rule declared there were no amendments to be 
offered to these amendments being offered today.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, as the designee of the chairman of the 
Committee on Ways and Means, I move to strike the last word.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman has that right.
  The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] for 5 
minutes.
  Without objection, the gentleman may control the time.
  There was no objection.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, so finally, a third rule, Mr. Chairman, as I continue 
with memories are made of this, and would call for the attention of the 
gentleman from Florida if he might, was reported which provided for 4 
hours of general debate, only minority substitute, and a set of en bloc 
amendments by the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Andrews]. Both the Michel 
and Andrews amendments were subject to 1 hour of debate each. The rule 
made in order a compromise and reported bill put together by the four 
committees of jurisdiction, 1 hour, four committees, not what we are 
having here today, as the base text for the amendment purposes.
  The rule was adopted 213 to 206, so there was just a tad bit of 
controversy in regards to that rule back in 1987 on the very same 
subject.
  The manager of the rule, the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Frost], said 
that was a modified closed rule, and so here we are today after hours 
of debate, many hours of debate.
  I would remind the gentleman from Florida that Members are in their 
offices. Members have heard this debate on and on and on, 15 hours in 
the Ag Committee, many, many hearings. I think the commentary is 
specious. I think it ill serves the <strong>House</strong>. I think it ill serves the 
intent of Members who brought to this title of the bill important 
amendments that they thought were important.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman 
from Michigan [Mr. Upton] if he chooses to comment.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I yield, to close the debate on this 
amendment, to my friend, the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Kolbe].
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Upton] has 30 seconds 
remaining. The gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] has 3 minutes 
remaining. That is all the time remaining.
                         PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY
  Mr. VOLKMER. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary inquiry.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state his parliamentary inquiry.
  Mr. VOLKMER. Has someone claimed time in opposition to the amendment?
  The CHAIRMAN. No one has.
  Mr. VOLKMER. I do so.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman has that right. The gentleman controls 10 
minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Missouri [Mr. Volkmer].
  Mr. VOLKMER. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as she may consume, but 
no longer than 5 minutes, to the gentlewoman from Florida [Mrs. 
Thurman].
  Mrs. THURMAN. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding time 
to me.
  I know that the gentleman from Texas [Mr. de la Garza] has spoken 
with the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Upton] about this amendment, and 
I understand that he was given an opportunity to try to perfect the 
amendment without any opposition from the minority side, because we 
recognize how important it is to make this correct.
  But I do want to make some points, because I think it is very 
important that we understand what we are trying to do and get this on 
the record.
  When the amendment was drafted, it failed to distinguish between a 
parent who fell behind in payments but was making a good-faith effort 
to make payments, and a deadbeat dad who refuses to pay support even 
though he had the money. And if you denied food stamps to these 
individuals who were trying to make their payments, recipients would 
have likely spent their money on food than on child support payments, 
which is why we have tried to correct that, and I suggest the gentleman 
was correct in doing that, and I appreciate it, and I hope that if this 
language is not correct, that we continue to work on this.
  However, let me just say to you all that I want to point out here on 
the table about the Deal substitute again.
  Because I think it is important that we understand we even have a 
stronger child support enforcement where we are demanding an 
uncompromising, punitive measure for deadbeat dads. It is basically a 
stronger version of legislation than was even introduced by 
Representatives Johnson, Kennelly, and others, and that the Deal 
substitute will strongly enforce income withholding and allow States to 
revoke licenses, and the substitute also enhances the paternity 
establishment by simplifying procedures in hospitals.
  What I would like to just suggest is that while we all agree that 
this is a very, very, very important part of this debate, that if you 
have questions and you are not pleased with what is happening on the 
other side right now with strong enforcement, I would hope that you 
would all, please, support the Deal amendment.
  Mr. VOLKMER. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, as the gentleman from Florida earlier had pointed out, 
this amendment, even though it may be somewhat meritorious on its face, 
but actually has very little to do with food stamp fraud. Very few 
people fit the category that the gentleman from Michigan is attempting 
to address to say to deny them food stamps, every benefit from food 
stamps, and yet we have within the proposal by the majority on that 
side provisions to reduce food stamps for needy families, people 
 [[Page H3608]] out there that need it, by USDA, says by $24 billion. 
Even CBO says $21 billion we are cutting back.
  And this little amendment is supposed to help it? This little 
amendment does not help those people who are going to be denied.
  How are they going to be denied? Well, they are going to be denied 
because their proposal under the thrifty food plan does not give you 
103 percent of the thrifty food plan. Oh, no, it says 2-percent 
increase a year, and as had been pointed out by USDA, that means by 
1999 people are going to be getting less than they are getting today. 
Everybody, the working poor, are going to get less. Children at home 
are going to get less than under the lunch program. They cannot eat at 
school. They cannot get their breakfast food for breakfast. They cannot 
get food stamps at home.
  Now, we were told in the Committee on Agriculture when we marked up 
this bill on this part of the welfare bill that it was only going to 
cost $16.5 billion. That is all they were going to take away. It is not 
through reform that money is taken away from people. It is through the 
thrifty food plan and the cap that they put on. They put a cap on there 
so that you cannot in times of recession, you are not going to have any 
increase. People are going to do away with food.
  Here we are talking about an amendment that does very little to 
correct the situation. There were amendments that this gentleman and 
others on this side tried to offer to this bill so that hungry kids 
could eat. We were denied the opportunity to offer that amendment.
  What is more important, to say that someone cannot get good stamps 
because he is not supporting the children? Yes, I agree, that is a good 
idea. But, gentlemen, that does not help the kids that are going
 to go hungry because of the cuts in this bill. That does not give them 
any more. You are not helping them a bit.
  Our amendments that we wanted to do to help, we did not get to offer. 
We were denied those, to take the cap off. We were denied to put the 
thrifty food plan back in in whole. We were denied. Why? Because they 
need that $21 or $24 billion to give to millionaires, to give to the 
big corporations. That is where the money is going to go, out of the 
mouths of babes. That is where it is going to go, gentleman from 
Michigan.
  This is where you are going to vote to put the money. Between now and 
2 weeks from now you will have voted to say take away from them and 
give it over here.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. VOLKMER. I yield to the gentleman from Michigan.
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, my amendment, the gentleman talked a little 
bit about fraud and how my amendment does not go after fraud. The 
gentleman is right. What my amendment does is this, it indicates that 
if there is a deadbeat parent that is out there that is not paying 
child support by order of the court and receiving food stamps, that is 
what it does.
  Mr. VOLKMER. He should not get the food stamps.
  Mr. UPTON. It does not go after fraud. It does not address a whole 
number of things you talked about. I was not able to add 100 amendments 
as someone would have perhaps liked on this bill.
  Mine is a very small amendment that goes after folks who abuse the 
system who are trying to get a free lunch at the expense of the 
taxpayers, and I say enough is enough.
  Mr. VOLKMER. Reclaiming my time, you are addressing more than one-
tenth of 1 percent of the problem. You were given 20 minutes of the 
time of the <strong>House</strong> to do it. I cannot get 1 minute to address problems.
  I would like to address one other problem here, that I took to the 
Committee on Rules an amendment which I was not given the opportunity 
to offer, and that is, under the language of the working requirements 
in this bill that you have before you today you could have people that 
are on welfare today that are not working, that should be working but 
they are not working, maybe they could not find a job, and if they have 
been on welfare for 90 days they do not meet the criteria in order to 
continue on welfare. They are off because they are not working 20 hours 
a week. They are given some time to find a job after this bill becomes 
law.
  Mr. EMERSON. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. VOLKMER. No, I will not yield. I tried to talk to the gentleman 
about this. We tried to talk to his staff and discussed the amendment 
with him. We were not even allowed a colloquy on those who were sick 
and ill and because they got laid off by the employer involuntarily and 
could not work 20 hours a week. We tried to discuss this. We could not 
even get a colloquy on that. We could not get a colloquy worked out 
with the gentleman's staff.
  So I will not yield. They will not even address the problem. What 
happens to the working poor, the man between 18 and 50 who is out there 
working trying to make it but for some reason or other he gets laid off 
by the employer, not because of his own fault, he could not work 20 
hours a week. They say you do not get it anymore. Now, is that more 
important than this amendment we have here today? I think so, I think 
so. At least as important. But they say ``no.''
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. ROBERTS. I yield 1 minute to the distinguished chairman of the 
Subcommittee on Human Resources of the Committee of the Ways and Means, 
the man who is most responsible for this welfare reform proposal, Mr. 
Shaw.
  Mr. SHAW. I thank the chairman for yielding to me.
  Mr. Chairman, I would say to my friend from Missouri, who has just 
consumed a great deal of time, do not trivialize the amendment that is 
presently on the floor. This is a very important amendment. There is 
nothing more frightening today than what is going on of the trend 
toward fathers not taking care of their children; fathers would have 
kids with unwed mothers and then disappear. In fact, we find they are 
having kids with a number of women and then disappearing and leaving 
the poor mothers to fend for themselves, to depend upon the life of 
dependence on welfare.
  This is an important amendment, and this deserves the time of this 
committee, and I am proud to support it.
  I say to my friend, the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Gibbons] that 
this amendment process, these are not unimportant amendments. We just 
passed an amendment a few hours ago on a voice vote, I might say, that 
was very important, in which we put $750 million more in child care. If 
you need child care, that is an important amendment. It is an important 
amendment, and that is why we supported it.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] has 2 minutes 
remaining, the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Upton] 1\1/2\ minutes 
remaining, and the gentleman from Missouri [Mr. Volkmer] 1\1/2\ minutes 
remaining.
  The gentleman from Missouri [Mr. Volkmer] has the right to close.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield 35.2 seconds to the gentleman from 
Michigan [Mr. Upton].
  Mr. UPTON. Mr. Chairman, I will add my 30 seconds to that which the 
gentleman just yielded to me, and I yield the balance of my time to my 
good friend, the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Kolbe], to close in 
support of the amendment.
  Mr. KOLBE. I thank the gentleman for yielding this time to me.
  Mr. Chairman, a lot of things have been said here on the floor today. 
It reminds me of a bloodhound who is sent out after a convict out there 
but somebody gave him the wrong piece of clothing. So we are chasing up 
the wrong tree, we are going after the wrong thing here.
  What we have heard is not what this amendment is about. It is very 
simple, as the gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Upton] explained just a few 
minutes ago.
  It is a good amendment. It says if an individual is getting food 
stamps now and under a court order to pay child support and he has not 
gone to court to get a delay because he cannot afford to make the 
payments under the court order, not having done that, no delay from the 
court, if he is not making payments, he should not be getting food 
stamps. The taxpayers should not 
 [[Page H3609]] be subsidizing him. They are trying, but they cannot 
afford to. They have not done that. They are under an order from the 
court, they are supposed to be making payments, they should not be 
getting food stamps. The rest of the taxpayers should not be 
subsidizing them. They are supposed to be making child support payments 
to support their kids. That is what this says. They do not get the food 
stamps if they are not current in their child support payments.
  It is as simple as that. It clearly fills a loophole, fills a gap in 
the bill. Something should be done. I do not know why all the 
discussion about other things.
  Mr. ROBERTS. I yield the balance of my time to the gentleman from 
Missouri [Mr. Emerson].
  Mr. EMERSON. I thank the chairman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, I am somewhat puzzled here because the distinguished 
ranking member of the Committee on Ways and Means, who controls the 
debate on the other side, was up making the speech complaining about 
the quality of debate. Surely having made such a complaint, he should 
insure that at least his side follows his admonition. The gentleman 
from Missouri made a lot of very baseless allegations, rhetorical 
statements that have absolutely nothing to do with the point of debate 
here.
  The gentleman says our staff denied him the right to find out some 
matters involved here. The gentleman's staff, so the record will be 
straight, the gentleman's staff discussed with our staff some questions 
relating to work requirements. The majority staff answered them. They 
added some language to a report which the gentleman was concerned 
about, in cooperation with the staff of the gentleman from Missouri, 
relating to retroactive work requirements.
  So let us be clear between substantive debate and rhetorical 
flourishes here. I wish the gentleman from Florida, having admonished 
us to stick to quality, would get his own troops in line.
  Mr. VOLKMER. Mr. Chairman, In order to have the outstanding quality 
in this debate, I yield the time remaining to the outstanding member of 
the Committee on Agriculture, the former chairman, now the ranking 
member of the full committee, the great gentleman from Texas [Mr. de la 
Garza].
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, yes, perhaps we have gone a little 
astray of the debate on the amendment. But--and not in defense, but 
feeling the same way as the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Gibbons]--the 
issue is the way that the rule is crafted, the inability for a ranking 
member to have sufficient time to discuss an issue.
  But the underlying theme here is the motive and the reason. We are 
going about with little amendments that cut a little bit here, save a 
little bit there. What for? So that we can pay for tax breaks for the 
rich. That is what this is all about.
  It is not what the chairman of the committee is intending to do. We 
have a good chairman. We have good members on this committee. But the 
underlying motive of the leadership is money to pay for tax breaks for 
the rich and take it from the children and take it from the elderly and 
take it from those that cannot defend themselves.
  So, getting back to the amendment, I commend the gentleman for his 
amendment. I think it is a good amendment. But I disagree with what we 
are going to do with the funds: Give it to the rich.
  The CHAIRMAN. All time has expired.
  The question is on the amendment, as modified, offered by the 
gentleman from Michigan [Mr. Upton].
  The amendment, as modified, was agreed to.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 25, 
printed in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.


                  Amendment Offered by Mr. Hostettler
  Mr. HOSTETTLER. Mr. Chairman, I offer amendment No. 25, printed in 
<strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mr. Hostettler:
       In title V of the bill, strike subtitle B and insert the 
     following:
           Subtitle B--Consolidating Food Assistance Programs
     SEC. 531. FOOD STAMP BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM.
       (a) Authority To Make Block Grants.--The Secretary of 
     Agriculture shall make grants in accordance with this section 
     to States to provide food assistance to individuals who are 
     economically disadvantaged and to individuals who are members 
     of economically disadvantaged families.
       (b) Distribution of Funds.--The funds appropriated to carry 
     out this section for any fiscal year shall be allotted among 
     the States as follows:
       (1) Of the aggregate amount to be distributed under this 
     section, .21 percent shall be reserved for grants to Guam, 
     the Virgin Islands of the United States, American Samoa, the 
     Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of 
     the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and 
     Palau.
       (2) Of the aggregate amount to be distributed under this 
     section, .24 percent shall be reserved for grants to tribal 
     organizations that have governmental jurisdiction over 
     geographically defined areas and shall be allocated equitably 
     by the Secretary among such organizations.
       (3) The remainder of such aggregate amount shall be 
     allocated among the remaining States. The amount allocated to 
     each of the remaining States shall bear the same proportion 
     to such remainder as the number of resident individuals in 
     such State who are economically disadvantaged separately or 
     as members of economically disadvantaged families bears to 
     the aggregate number of resident individuals in all such 
     remaining States who are economically disadvantaged 
     separately or as members of economically disadvantaged 
     families.
       (c) Eligibility To Receive Grants.--To be eligible to 
     receive a grant in the amount allotted to a State for a 
     fiscal year, such State shall submit to the Secretary an 
     application in such form, and containing such information and 
     assurances, as the Secretary may require by rule, including--
       (1) an assurance that such grant will be expended by the 
     State to provide food assistance to resident individuals in 
     such State who are economically disadvantaged separately or 
     as members of economically disadvantaged families,
       (2) an assurance that not more than 5 percent of such grant 
     will be expended by the State for administrative costs 
     incurred to provide assistance under this section, and
       (3) an assurance that an individual who has not worked 32 
     hours in a calendar month shall be ineligible to received 
     food assistance under this subtitle during the succeeding 
     month unless such individual is--
       (A) disabled,
       (B) has attained 60 years of age, or
       (C) residing with one or more of such individual's children 
     who have not attained 18 years of age, but is not residing 
     with any other parent of any of such children, unless that 
     other parent is disabled.
       (d) Annual Report.--Each State that receives funds 
     appropriated to carry out this section for a fiscal year 
     shall submit the Secretary, not later than May 1 following 
     such fiscal year, a report--
       (1) specifying the number of families who received food 
     assistance under this section provided by such State in such 
     fiscal year;
       (2) specifying the number of individuals who received food 
     assistance under this section provided by such State in such 
     fiscal year;
       (3) the amount of such funds expended in such fiscal year 
     by such State to provide food assistance; and
       (4) the administrative costs incurred in such fiscal year 
     by such State to provide food assistance.
       (e) Limitation.--No State or political subdivision of a 
     State that receives funds provided under this title shall 
     replace any employed worker with an individual who is 
     participating in a work program for the purpose of complying 
     with subsection (c)(3). Such an individual may be placed in 
     any position offered by the State or political subdivision 
     that--
       (A) is a new position,
       (B) is a position that became available in the normal 
     course of conducting the business of the State or political 
     subdivision,
       (C) involves performing work that would otherwise be 
     performed on an overtime basis by a worker who is not an 
     individual participating in such program, or
       (D) that is a position which became available by shifting a 
     current employee to an alternate position.
       (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--(1) There are 
     authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section 
     $26,245,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996, 1997, 
     1998, 1999, and 2000.
       (2) For the purpose of affording adequate notice of funding 
     available under this section, an appropriation to carry out 
     this section is authorized to be included in an appropriation 
     Act for the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year for which 
     such appropriation is available for obligation.
     SEC. 532. AVAILABILITY OF FEDERAL COUPON SYSTEM TO STATES.
       (a) Issuance, Purchase, and Use of Coupons.--The Secretary 
     shall issue, and make available for purchase by States, 
     coupons for the retail purchase of food from retail food 
     stores that are approved in accordance with subsection (b). 
     Coupons issued, purchased, and used as provided in this 
     section shall be 
      [[Page H3610]] redeemable at face value by the Secretary 
     through the facilities of the Treasury of the United States. 
     The purchase price of each coupon issued under this 
     subsection shall be the face value of such coupon.
       (b) Approval of Retail Food Stores and Wholesale Food 
     Concerns.--(1) Regulations issued pursuant to this section 
     shall provide for the submission of applications for approval 
     by retail food stores and wholesale food concerns which 
     desire to be authorized to accept and redeem coupons under 
     this section. In determining the qualifications of 
     applicants, there shall be considered among such other 
     factors as may be appropriate, the following:
       (A) The nature and extent of the food business conducted by 
     the applicant.
       (B) The volume of coupon business which may reasonably be 
     expected to be conducted by the applicant food store or 
     wholesale food concern.
       (C) The business integrity and reputation of the applicant.
     Approval of an applicant shall be evidenced by the issuance 
     to such applicant of a nontransferable certificate of 
     approval. The Secretary is authorized to issue regulations 
     providing for a periodic reauthorization of retail food 
     stores and wholesale food concerns.
       (2) A buyer or transferee (other than a bona fide buyer or 
     transferee) of a retail food store or wholesale food concern 
     that has been disqualified under subsection (d) may not 
     accept or redeem coupons until the Secretary receives full 
     payment of any penalty imposed on such store or concern.
       (3) Regulations issued pursuant to this section shall 
     require an applicant retail food store or wholesale food 
     concern to submit information which will permit a 
     determination to be made as to whether such applicant 
     qualifies, or continues to qualify, for approval under this 
     section or the regulations issued pursuant to this section. 
     Regulations issued pursuant to this section shall provide for 
     safeguards which limit the use or disclosure of information 
     obtained under the authority granted by this subsection to 
     purposes directly connected with administration and 
     enforcement of this section or the regulations issued 
     pursuant to this section, except that such information may be 
     disclosed to and used by States that purchase such coupons.
       (4) Any retail food store or wholesale food concern which 
     has failed upon application to receive approval to 
     participate in the program under this sectionmay obtain a 
     hearing on such refusal as provided in subsection (f).
       (c) Redemption of Coupons.--Regulations issued under this 
     section shall provide for the redemption of coupons accepted 
     by retail food stores through approved wholesale food 
     concerns or through financial institutions which are insured 
     by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or which are 
     insured under the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1751 et 
     seq.) and have retail food stores or wholesale food concerns 
     in their field of membership, with the cooperation of the 
     Treasury Department, except that retail food stores defined 
     in section 533(9)(D) shall be authorized to redeem their 
     members' food coupons prior to receipt by the members of the 
     food so purchased, and publicly operated community mental 
     health centers or private nonprofit organizations or 
     institutions which serve meals to narcotics addicts or 
     alcoholics in drug addiction or alcoholic treatment and 
     rehabilitation programs, public and private nonprofit 
     shelters that prepare and serve meals for battered women and 
     children, public or private nonprofit group living 
     arrangements that serve meals to disabled or blind residents, 
     and public or private nonprofit establishments, or public or 
     private nonprofit shelters that feed individuals who do not 
     reside in permanent dwellings and individuals who have no 
     fixed mailing addresses shall not be authorized to redeem 
     coupons through financial institutions which are insured by 
     the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal 
     Credit Union Act. No financial institution may impose on or 
     collect from a retail food store a fee or other charge for 
     the redemption of coupons that are submitted to the financial 
     institution in a manner consistent with the requirements, 
     other than any requirements relating to cancellation of 
     coupons, for the presentation of coupons by financial 
     institutions to the Federal Reserve banks.
       (d) Civil Money Penalties and Disqualification of Retail 
     Food Stores and Wholesale Food Concerns.--(1) Any approved 
     retail food store or wholesale food concern may be 
     disqualified for a specified period of time from further 
     participation in the coupon program under this section, or 
     subjected to a civil money penalty of up to $10,000 for each 
     violation if the Secretary determines that its 
     disqualification would cause hardship to individuals who 
     receive coupons, on a finding, made as specified in the 
     regulations, that such store or concern has violated this 
     section or the regulations issued pursuant to this section.
       (2) Disqualification under paragraph (1) shall be--
       (A) for a reasonable period of time, of no less than 6 
     months nor more than 5 years, upon the first occasion of 
     disqualification,
       (B) for a reasonable period of time, of no less than 12 
     months nor more than 10 years, upon the second occasion of 
     disqualification, and
       (C) permanent upon--
       (i) the third occasion of disqualification,
       (ii) the first occasion or any subsequent occasion of a 
     disqualification based on the purchase of coupons or 
     trafficking in coupons by a retail food store or wholesale 
     food concern, except that the Secretary shall have the 
     discretion to impose a civil money penalty of up to $20,000 
     for each violation (except that the amount of civil money 
     penalties imposed for violations occurring during a single 
     investigation may not exceed $40,000) in lieu of 
     disqualification under this subparagraph, for such purchase 
     of coupons or trafficking in coupons that constitutes a 
     violation of this section or the regulations issued pursuant 
     to this section, if the Secretary determines that there is 
     substantial evidence (including evidence that neither the 
     ownership nor management of the store or food concern was 
     aware of, approved, benefited from, or was involved in the 
     conduct or approval of the violation) that such store or food 
     concern had an effective policy and program in effect to 
     prevent violations of this section and such regulations, or
       (iii) a finding of the sale of firearms, ammunition, 
     explosives, or controlled substance (as defined in section 
     802 of title 21, United States Code) for coupons, except that 
     the Secretary shall have the discretion to impose a civil 
     money penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation (except 
     that the amount of civil money penalties imposed for 
     violations occurring during a single investigation may not 
     exceed $40,000) in lieu of disqualification under this 
     subparagraph if the Secretary determines that there is 
     substantial evidence (including evidence that neither the 
     ownership nor management of the store or food concern was 
     aware of, approved, benefited from, or was involved in the 
     conduct or approval of the violation) that the store or food 
     concern had an effective policy and program in effect to 
     prevent violations of this section.
       (3) The action of disqualification or the imposition of a 
     civil money penalty shall be subject to review as provided in 
     subsection (f).
       (4) As a condition of authorization to accept and redeem 
     coupons issued under subsection (a), the Secretary may 
     require a retail food store or wholesale food concern which 
     has been disqualified or subjected to a civil penalty 
     pursuant to paragraph (1) to furnish a bond to cover the 
     value of coupons which such store or concern may in the 
     future accept and redeem in violation of this section. The 
     Secretary shall, by regulation, prescribe the amount, terms, 
     and conditions of such bond. If the Secretary finds that such 
     store or concern has accepted and redeemed coupons in 
     violation of this section after furnishing such bond, such 
     store or concern shall forfeit to the Secretary an amount of 
     such bond which is equal to the value of coupons accepted and 
     redeemed by such store or concern in violation of this 
     section. Such store or concern may obtain a hearing on such 
     forfeiture pursuant to subsection (f).
       (5)(A) In the event any retail food store or wholesale food 
     concern that has been disqualified under paragraph (1) is 
     sold or the ownership thereof is otherwise transferred to a 
     purchaser or transferee, the person or persons who sell or 
     otherwise transfer ownership of the retail food store or 
     wholesale food concern shall be subjected to a civil money 
     penalty in an amount established by the Secretary through 
     regulations to reflect that portion of the disqualification 
     period that has not yet expired. If the retail food store or 
     wholesale food concern has been disqualified permanently, the 
     civil money penalty shall be double the penalty for a 10-year 
     disqualification period, as calculated under regulations 
     issued by the Secretary. The disqualification period imposed 
     under paragraph (2) shall continue in effect as to the person 
     or persons who sell or otherwise transfer ownership of the 
     retail food store or wholesale food concern notwithstanding 
     the imposition of a civil money penalty under this paragraph.
       (B) At any time after a civil money penalty imposed under 
     subparagraph (A) has become final under subsection (f)(1), 
     the Secretary may request the Attorney General of the United 
     States to institute a civil action against the person or 
     persons subject to the penalty in a district court of the 
     United States for any district in which such person or 
     persons are found, reside, or transact business to collect 
     the penalty and such court shall have jurisdiction to hear 
     and decide such action. In such action, the validity and 
     amount of such penalty shall not be subject to review.
       (C) The Secretary may impose a fine against any retail food 
     store or wholesale food concern that accepts coupons that are 
     not accompanied by the corresponding book cover, other than 
     the denomination of coupons used for making change as 
     specified in regulations issued under this section. The 
     amount of any such fine shall be established by the Secretary 
     and may be assessed and collected separately in accordance 
     with regulations issued under this section or in combination 
     with any fiscal claim established by the Secretary. The 
     Attorney General of the United States may institute judicial 
     action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the 
     store or concern to collect the fine.
       (6) The Secretary may impose a fine against any person not 
     approved by the Secretary to accept and redeem coupons who 
     violates this section or a regulation issued under this 
     section, including violations concerning the acceptance of 
     coupons. The amount of any such fine shall be established by 
     the Secretary and may be assessed and 
      [[Page H3611]] collected in accordance with regulations 
     issued under this section separately or in combination with 
     any fiscal claim established by the Secretary. The Attorney 
     General of the United States may institute judicial action in 
     any court of competent jurisdiction against the person to 
     collect the fine.
       (e) Collection and Disposition of Claims.--The Secretary 
     shall have the power to determine the amount of and settle 
     and adjust any claim and to compromise or deny all or part of 
     any such claim or claims arising under this section or the 
     regulations issued pursuant to this section, including, but 
     not limited to, claims arising from fraudulent and 
     nonfraudulent overissuances to recipients, including the 
     power to waive claims if the Secretary determines that to do 
     so would serve the purposes of this section. Such powers with 
     respect to claims against recipients may be delegated by the 
     Secretary to State agencies.
       (f) Administrative and Judicial Review.--(1) Whenever--
       (A) an application of a retail food store or wholesale food 
     concern for approval to accept and redeem coupons issued 
     under subsection (a) is denied pursuant to this section,
       (B) a retail food store or wholesale food concern is 
     disqualified or subjected to a civil money penalty under 
     subsection (d),
       (C) all or part of any claim of a retail food store or 
     wholesale food concern is denied under subsection (e), or
       (D) a claim against a State is stated pursuant to 
     subsection (e),
     notice of such administrative action shall be issued to the 
     retail food store, wholesale food concern, or State involved. 
     Such notice shall be delivered by certified mail or personal 
     service. If such store, concern, or State is aggrieved by 
     such action, it may, in accordance with regulations 
     promulgated under this section, within 10 days of the date of 
     delivery of such notice, file a written request for an 
     opportunity to submit information in support of its position 
     to such person or persons as the regulations may designate. 
     If such a request is not made or if such store, concern, or 
     State fails to submit information in support of its position 
     after filing a request, the administrative determination 
     shall be final. If such request is made by such store, 
     concern, or State such information as may be submitted by 
     such store, concern, or State as well as such other 
     information as may be available, shall be reviewed by the 
     person or persons designated by the Secretary, who shall, 
     subject to the right of judicial review hereinafter provided, 
     make a determination which shall be final and which shall 
     take effect 30 days after the date of the delivery or service 
     of such final notice of determination. If such store, 
     concern, or State feels aggrieved by such final 
     determination, it may obtain judicial review thereof by 
     filing a complaint against the United States in the United 
     States court for the district in which it resides or is 
     engaged in business, or, in the case of a retail food store 
     or wholesale food concern, in any court of record of the 
     State having competent jurisdiction, within 30 days after the 
     date of delivery or service of the final notice of 
     determination upon it, requesting the court to set aside such 
     determination. The copy of the summons and complaint required 
     to be delivered to the official or agency whose order is 
     being attacked shall be sent to the Secretary or such person 
     or persons as the Secretary may designate to receive service 
     of process. The suit in the United States district court or 
     State court shall be a trial de novo by the court in which 
     the court shall determine the validity of the questioned 
     administrative action in issue. If the court determines that 
     such administrative action is invalid, it shall enter such 
     judgment or order as it determines is in accordance with the 
     law and the evidence. During the pendency of such judicial 
     review, or any appeal therefrom, the administrative action 
     under review shall be and remain in full force and effect, 
     unless on application to the court on not less than ten days' 
     notice, and after hearing thereon and a consideration by the 
     court of the applicant's likelihood of prevailing on the 
     merits and of irreparable injury, the court temporarily stays 
     such administrative action pending disposition of such trial 
     or appeal.
       (g) Violations and Enforcement.--(1) Subject to paragraph 
     (2), whoever knowingly uses, transfers, acquires, alters, or 
     possesses coupons in any manner contrary to this section or 
     the regulations issued pursuant to this section shall, if 
     such coupons are of a value of $5,000 or more, be guilty of a 
     felony and shall be fined not more than $250,000 or 
     imprisoned for not more than 20 years, or both, and shall, if 
     such coupons are of a value of $100 or more, but less than 
     $5,000, be guilty of a felony and shall, upon the first 
     conviction thereof, be fined not more than $10,000 or 
     imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both, and, upon the 
     second and any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be 
     imprisoned for not less than 6 months nor more than 5 years 
     and may also be fined not more than $10,000 or, if such 
     coupons are of a value of less than $100, shall be guilty of 
     a misdemeanor, and, upon the first conviction thereof, shall 
     be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 
     one year, or both, and upon the second and any subsequent 
     conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than one 
     year and may also be fined not more than $1,000.
       (2) In the case of any individual convicted of an offense 
     under paragraph (1), the court may permit such individual to 
     perform work approved by the court for the purpose of 
     providing restitution for losses incurred by the United 
     States and the State as a result of the offense for which 
     such individual was convicted. If the court permits such 
     individual to perform such work and such individual agrees 
     thereto, the court shall withhold the imposition of the 
     sentence on the condition that such individual perform the 
     assigned work. Upon the successful completion of the assigned 
     work the court may suspend such sentence.
       (3) Whoever presents, or causes to be presented, coupons 
     for payment or redemption of the value of $100 or more, 
     knowing the same to have been received, transferred, or used 
     in any manner in violation of this section or the regulations 
     issued under this section, shall be guilty of a felony and, 
     upon the first conviction thereof, shall be fined not more 
     than $20,000 or imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or 
     both, and, upon the second and any subsequent conviction 
     thereof, shall be imprisoned for not less than one year nor 
     more than 5 years and may also be fined not more than 
     $20,000, or, if such coupons are of a value of less than 
     $100, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon the first 
     conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or 
     imprisoned for not more than one year, or both, and, upon the 
     second and any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be 
     imprisoned for not more than one year and may also be fined 
     not more than $1,000.
     SEC. 533. DEFINITIONS.
       For purposes of this subtitle--
       (1) the term ``coupon'' means any coupon, stamp, or type of 
     certificate, but does not include currency,
       (2) the term ``economically disadvantaged'' means an 
     individual or a family, as the case may be, whose income does 
     not exceed the most recent lower living standard income level 
     published by the Department of Labor,
       (3) the term ``elderly or disabled individual'' means an 
     individual who--
       (A) is 60 years of age or older,
       (B)(i) receives supplemental security income benefits under 
     title XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1381 et 
     seq.), or Federally or State administered supplemental 
     benefits of the type described in section 212(a) of Public 
     Law 93-66 (42 U.S.C. 1382 note), or
       (ii) receives Federally or State administered supplemental 
     assistance of the type described in section 1616(a) of the 
     Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1382e(a)), interim assistance 
     pending receipt of supplemental security income, disability-
     related medical assistance under title XIX of the Social 
     Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), or disability-based 
     State general assistance benefits, if the Secretary 
     determines that such benefits are conditioned on meeting 
     disability or blindness criteria at least as stringent as 
     those used under title XVI of the Social Security Act,
       (C) receives disability or blindness payments under title 
     I, II, X, XIV, or XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
     301 et seq.) or receives disability retirement benefits from 
     a governmental agency because of a disability considered 
     permanent under section 221(i) of the Social Security Act (42 
     U.S.C. 421(i)),
       (D) is a veteran who--
       (i) has a service-connected or non-service-connected 
     disability which is rated as total under title 38, United 
     States Code, or
       (ii) is considered in need of regular aid and attendance or 
     permanently housebound under such title,
       (E) is a surviving spouse of a veteran and--
       (i) is considered in need of regular aid and attendance or 
     permanently housebound under title 38, United States Code, or
       (ii) is entitled to compensation for a service-connected 
     death or pension benefits for a non-service-connected death 
     under title 38, United States Code, and has a disability 
     considered permanent under section 221(i) of the Social 
     Security Act (42 U.S.C. 421(i)),
       (F) is a child of a veteran and--
       (i) is considered permanently incapable of self-support 
     under section 414 of title 38, United States Code, or
       (ii) is entitled to compensation for a service-connected 
     death or pension benefits for a non-service-connected death 
     under title 38, United States Code, and has a disability 
     considered permanent under section 221(i) of the Social 
     Security Act (42 U.S.C. 421(i)), or
       (G) is an individual receiving an annuity under section 
     2(a)(1)(iv) or 2(a)(1)(v) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 
     1974 (45 U.S.C. 231a(a)(1)(iv) or 231a(a)(1)(v)), if the 
     individual's service as an employee under the Railroad 
     Retirement Act of 1974, after December 31, 1936, had been 
     included in the term ``employment'' as defined in the Social 
     Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), and if an application 
     for disability benefits had been filed,
       (4) the term ``food'' means, for purposes of section 532(a) 
     only--
       (A) any food or food product for home consumption except 
     alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and hot foods or hot food 
     products ready for immediate consumption other than those 
     authorized pursuant to subparagraphs (C), (D), (E), (G), (H), 
     and (I),
       (B) seeds and plants for use in gardens to produce food for 
     the personal consumption of the eligible individuals,
       (C) in the case of those persons who are 60 years of age or 
     over or who receive supplemental security income benefits or 
     disability or blindness payments under title I, II, X, XIV, 
     or XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), 
     and their spouses, meals prepared by and served in senior 
     citizens' centers, apartment buildings occupied primarily by 
     such persons, public or private 
      [[Page H3612]] nonprofit establishments (eating or 
     otherwise) that feed such persons, private establishments 
     that contract with the appropriate agency of the State to 
     offer meals for such persons at concessional prices, and 
     meals prepared for and served to residents of federally 
     subsidized housing for the elderly,
       (D) in the case of persons 60 years of age or over and 
     persons who are physically or mentally handicapped or 
     otherwise so disabled that they are unable adequately to 
     prepare all of their meals, meals prepared for and delivered 
     to them (and their spouses) at their home by a public or 
     private nonprofit organization or by a private establishment 
     that contracts with the appropriate State agency to perform 
     such services at concessional prices,
       (E) in the case of narcotics addicts or alcoholics, and 
     their children, served by drug addiction or alcoholic 
     treatment and rehabilitation programs, meals prepared and 
     served under such programs,
       (F) in the case of eligible individuals living in Alaska, 
     equipment for procuring food by hunting and fishing, such as 
     nets, hooks, rods, harpoons, and knives (but not equipment 
     for purposes of transportation, clothing, or shelter, and not 
     firearms, ammunition, and explosives) if the Secretary 
     determines that such individuals are located in an area of 
     the State where it is extremely difficult to reach stores 
     selling food and that such individuals depend to a 
     substantial extent upon hunting and fishing for subsistence,
       (G) in the case of disabled or blind recipients of benefits 
     under title I, II, X, XIV, or XVI of the Social Security Act 
     (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), or are individuals described in 
     subparagraphs (B) through (G) of paragraph (4), who are 
     residents in a public or private nonprofit group living 
     arrangement that serves no more than 16 residents and is 
     certified by the appropriate State agency or agencies under 
     regulations issued under section 1616(e) of the Social 
     Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1382e(e)) or under standards 
     determined by the Secretary to be comparable to standards 
     implemented by appropriate State agencies under such section, 
     meals prepared and served under such arrangement,
       (H) in the case of women and children temporarily residing 
     in public or private nonprofit shelters for battered women 
     and children, meals prepared and served, by such shelters, 
     and
       (I) in the case of individuals that do not reside in 
     permanent dwellings and individuals that have no fixed 
     mailing addresses, meals prepared for and served by a public 
     or private nonprofit establishment (approved by an 
     appropriate State or local agency) that feeds such 
     individuals and by private establishments that contract with 
     the appropriate agency of the State to offer meals for such 
     individuals at concessional prices,
       (5) the term ``retail food store'' means--
       (A) an establishment or recognized department thereof or 
     <strong>house</strong>-to-<strong>house</strong> trade route, over 50 percent of whose food 
     sales volume, as determined by visual inspection, sales 
     records, purchase records, or other inventory or accounting 
     recordkeeping methods that are customary or reasonable in the 
     retail food industry, consists of staple food items for home 
     preparation and consumption, such as meat, poultry, fish, 
     bread, cereals, vegetables, fruits, dairy products, and the 
     like, but not including accessory food items, such as coffee, 
     tea, cocoa, carbonated and uncarbonated drinks, candy, 
     condiments, and spices,
       (B) an establishment, organization, program, or group 
     living arrangement referred to in subparagraph (C), (D), (E), 
     (G), (H), or (I) of paragraph (5),
       (C) a store purveying the hunting and fishing equipment 
     described in paragraph (5)(F), or
       (D) any private nonprofit cooperative food purchasing 
     venture, including those in which the members pay for food 
     purchased prior to the receipt of such food,
       (6) the term ``school'' means an elementary, intermediate, 
     or secondary school,
       (7) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of 
     Agriculture,
       (8) the term ``State'' means any of the several States, the 
     District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
     the Virgin Islands of the United States, American Samoa, the 
     Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of 
     the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, 
     Palau, or a tribal organization that exercises governmental 
     jurisdiction over a geographically defined area, and
       (9) the term ``tribal organization'' has the meaning given 
     it in section 4(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and 
     Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b(l)).
     SEC. 534. REPEALER.
       The Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) is 
     repealed.
       Strike section 591 of the bill and insert the following:
     SEC. 591. EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICATION OF REPEALER.
       (a) Effective Dates.--
       (1) General effective date of subtitle A.Subtitle A shall 
     take effect on October 1, 1995.
       (2) General effective date of subtitle B.--Except as 
     provided in subsection (b), subtitle B and the repeal made by 
     section 534 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of 
     this Act.
       (3) Special effective date.--The repeal made by section 534 
     shall not take effect until the first day of the first fiscal 
     year for which funds are appropriated more than 180 days in 
     advance of such fiscal year to carry out section 531.
       (b) Application of Repealer.--The repeal made by section 
     534 shall not apply with respect to--
       (1) powers, duties, functions, rights, claims, penalties, 
     or obligations applicable to financial assistance provided 
     under the Food Stamp Act of 1977 before the effective date of 
     such repeal, and
       (2) administrative actions and proceedings commenced before 
     such date, or authorized before such date to be commenced, 
     under such Act.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Indiana [Mr. 
Hostettler] will be recognized for 10 minutes, and a Member opposed 
will be recognized for 10 minutes.
  Is there a Member in opposition?
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I rise to oppose the amendment and 
seek the time allotted.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Texas [Mr. de la Garza] will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  Mr. GIBBONS. Mr. Chairman, in order to extend debate time, I move to 
strike the last word and ask unanimous consent that I may yield that 
time to the gentleman from Texas [Mr. de la Garza], the former chairman 
of the Committee on Agriculture, and that he be allowed to control the 
time and yield it in blocks.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Florida?
  There was no objection.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Texas [Mr. de la Garza] will be 
recognized for 15 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Indiana [Mr. Hostettler].
  Mr. HOSTETTLER. Mr. Chairman, for the past 30 years in this country 
we have conducted a social experiment. More than $5 trillion has been 
spent on this experiment, aimed at exterminating poverty in the United 
States. Despite this massive outpouring of taxpayer dollars, poverty 
actually has increased. The people sitting in the coffee shops in 
Vincennes, IN, understand from this data that letting Washington, DC, 
handle it is a bad idea. The people on the job site in French Lick 
understand that taking more and more of their tax dollars is not only 
bad for them, but it does not help the people it is supposed to help. 
The people dropping off their kids at school in Chandler understand the 
local officials and other residents of communities have a far better 
perspective on dealing with the problems of the economically 
disadvantaged than do career bureaucrats in a Washington, DC, office. 
Washington, DC, does not have the answers; the people of the eighth 
District of Indiana and all the other districts in the U.S. do.
  This is why I am introducing an amendment calling for repeal of the 
Food Stamp Act of 1977 and block granting cash to be used by the States 
for food assistance to the economically disadvantaged. Funding would be 
frozen at fiscal year 1995 levels, around $26.25 billion. This would 
bring a savings of $18.6 billion over current Congressional Budget 
Office baseline levels. The savings come from ending the individual 
entitlements status of the programs. The amendment also includes a work 
provision calling for able-bodied individuals who are under the age of 
60 and who are not at home alone with a dependent child to work at 
least 32 hours each month. Only 5 percent of the grant funds can be 
used for administrative costs, meaning 95 percent of the funds go to 
food assistance.
  I signed the Contract With America, Mr. Chairman, not for political 
gain, but because I though the policies it espoused were good policies. 
This amendment returns to the original concept of H.R. 4, which 
included the block granting of food stamps. There are concerns raised 
by some about how well the States will administer the program. While I 
resist the temptation to answer this with ``They can't do any worse 
than has the federal government,'' I think the testimony from Ag 
Committee hearings, the track record of the Federal Government and the 
feeling of the public at large bear testament to the fact that it is 
time to give this program to the States--as the other committees have 
decided to do with many of the other programs.
  It seems we need to be reminded that the taxpayers providing funding 
for 
 [[Page H3613]] food stamps are residents of the States. It is the 
taxpayers' money, not money belonging to the Agriculture Committee or 
to the Congress or to the Federal Government. It belongs to the people. 
We should, therefore, take the administration of the program closer to 
the people. Governor Thompson and Governor Engler among others have 
shown just how innovative and effective welfare reform at the State 
level can be.
  I do not question the sincerity of my Republican colleagues' belief 
that they can reform the program at the Federal level, rather I 
sincerely disagree with the policy itself. Under Federal guidance, food 
stamp spending has increased nearly 300 percent since 1979. Today more 
than 28 million people in the United States receive food stamps.
  For true and comprehensive welfare reform to take place, we at the 
Federal level must let go and let the more local bodies of government--
along with the private sector responsibility. This is what has been 
done in much of this welfare reform bill, and this is what should be 
done with food stamps.
  With that, Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that I may 
yield en bloc half of my time to the gentleman from Kansas [Mr. 
Roberts], the distinguished chairman of the Committee on Agriculture.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Texas?
  There was no objection.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to our distinguished 
colleague, the gentleman from North Dakota [Mr. Pomeroy].
  Mr. POMEROY. Mr. Chairman, you know, the gentleman who is sponsoring 
the amendment is absolutely correct in his desire to cut spending. He 
just happens to be incorrect in the method which his amendment seeks to 
accomplish that end. The amendment under consideration, like the bill 
it amends, fails to take into account something pretty basic, something 
any consumer in any corner of any of our neighborhoods could tell us: 
The cost of food goes up.
  Mr. Chairman, for goodness sakes, the cost of a box of cereal now is 
in excess of $4. That is more than it was last year, quite a bit more 
than it was the year before that. That is why the cost of the Food 
Stamp Program has to track the increasing costs in groceries. Food 
costs go up for all of us, including those on food stamps.
  The amendment under consideration, like the bill it seeks to amend, 
fails to take into account another fact: If you have more people on 
food stamps, you are going to have to have more funds available for 
those people's needs. Only Jesus can feed the multitude from a single 
little boy's portion. For us mere mortals, if we are going to have more 
people, we are going to need more portions, it is as simple as that.
  Mr. Chairman, this is critically important, not for the people 
presently on assistance, presently on welfare, who have been so 
denigrated in the debate that has taken place, but working families 
hanging in there, standing on their own, but one recession away from 
losing their job, losing their pay check and needing the assistance of 
food stamps. A critical part of this Nation's safety net is the ability 
of programs to rise and shrink depending on economic cycles. We have 
had recessions before, and we will certainly have them again.
  This chart indicates the difference between the Deal substitute and 
the bill that it seeks to amend relative to the costs of food. The red 
line shows that in years to come, under the bill before us, we do not 
keep up with the cost of food.
  Mr. HOSTETTLER. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the distinguished 
gentleman from Florida [Mr. Weldon].
  Mr. WELDON of Florida. Mr. Chairman, I have a prepared text here, but 
there is something else that I really want to say as part of this 
debate here.
  I began to realize there was something wrong with our food stamp 
program when I was in college. I worked my way through college, and I 
had a friend who did not work, but he went out, and he applied for and 
qualified for food stamps, and, when I was working on weekends from 11 
o'clock at night until 7 a.m. in the morning and when I was working in 
the evenings in the dormitory, he was not, and he was qualifying for 
food stamps, and that is the problem with these programs. Some of the 
people who get them really do need them, and some of the people do not.
  What we are saying here with the Hostettler amendment is we are going 
to put it out at the lowest level where the local officials can really 
seriously monitor who really needs these programs and who does not 
because we have a serious problem with fraud, and we are spending the 
people's money. We are not spending our money; we are spending the 
people's money, and most of the people work very, very hard for this, 
and my colleague here has come up with what I think is is very good 
idea, to help improve the efficiency of this program, and I 
throughoughly support the Hostettler amendment to this bill.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to our distinguished 
colleague, the gentlewoman from North Carolina [Mr. Clayton].
  Mrs. CLAYTON. Mr. Chairman, this amendment, like this bill, will hurt 
poor families and hurt children. But, the amendment goes further. It 
will also hurt farmers, hurt large and small grocery stores and hurt 
the economy. The Food Stamp Program feeds more than poor families. It 
feeds the farmers who feed America. It fees those who retail foods, 
along the dusty country roads and in the large urban shopping centers.
  For most in the food business, up to 30 percent of their revenue 
comes from the Food Stamp Program. Cut food stamps and you cut 
commodities. Cut food stamps and you choke America's economy. Cut food 
stamps and you put people out of work and maybe into welfare. I say cut 
food stamps because a block grant is a cut. It is a cut because, unlike 
current law, there would be no automatic increases in funding to keep 
pace for inflation under a block grant program. It is a cut because, 
when populations rise, as they will over the next years, the funds do 
not rise. The demand rises, the funds are frozen. That is a cut.
  A block grant is a cut because States will be able to use one-fifth 
of the money for things other than food. If a State spends 20 percent 
less on food in 1 year than was spent in a prior year, that is a cut. 
We confronted this issue of block granting food stamps in the Committee 
on Agriculture. In fact, we spent, as the Chairman said, 15 hours, into 
the early morning, when we considered title 5 of this bill. On a bi-
partisan basis, Democrats joined with Republicans, and we soundly 
rejected the block grant proposal. That decision was wise then, and it 
is wise now. This amendment also requires work for food stamps.
  In some instances, it requires 32 hours of work per week. Yet, it 
does not mandate the minimum wage as compensation for that work. That 
is another issue we confronted in the Agriculture Committee, and, 
again, on a bi-partisan basis, Democrats and Republicans, 
overwhelmingly rejected forced labor at less than the minimum wage. 
This amendment hurts everybody, Mr. Chairman. It hurts the rich, the 
poor, it is poorly conceived, ill-advised and goes against the 
considered, bi-partisan opinion of the committee of jurisdiction. It 
deserves to be rejected.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, the amendment offered by the gentleman from Indiana 
[Mr. Hostettler] does provide that the Food Stamp Program will be block 
granted to the States. I rise in reluctant opposition.
  The committee considered several policy options as we were 
considering food stamp reform, and in contacting the Governors of the 
States and the National Governors' Conference, not to mention many 
experts in the field, the first policy option that we considered was 
that of the gentleman from Indiana [Mr. Hostettler]. However the 
Republican leadership, along with the committee leadership, made the 
determination that the Food Stamp Program should remain at the Federal 
level as a safety net during the transition period while States begin 
to reform the entire welfare programs, and the committee strongly 
believes that the intent of the gentleman is very good, but that the 
Food Stamp Program should be reformed. After all, it 
 [[Page H3614]] is our responsibility before it is converted into, into 
a block grant.
  Fraud and trafficking, as we have heard, are serious problems in the 
program. We do have significant reforms, and they are bipartisan, and 
States will have the responsibility to institute reforms of the AFDC 
program and other State programs. They will be harmonized, and, while 
this is going on, we think it is important that there be a food program 
for needy families.
  We have a provision allowing States that have implemented the EBT 
system that has been much discussed in this debate on a statewide basis 
to administer the Food Stamp Program in a block grant. Therefore States 
can have a block grant for food stamps, as the gentleman desires, if 
they have taken steps to reduce fraud and if they have really started 
to implement an efficient system to issue the food benefits. The EBT 
block grant in H.R. 4 says that food benefits can only be used for 
food. The Hostettler amendment will allow States to issue food benefits 
and cash. The gentleman has a very innovative amendment. It was a good 
amendment. This is a very sharp departure from our current practice. 
Food stamps should be used only for food. Under that amendment what has 
been food benefits can be used for any item.
  My opposition to this amendment does not mean there will never be any 
block grant for the food stamp program, quite the contrary, but the 
Committee on Agriculture will continue its oversight of the program, 
monitor the State's progress of AFDC and other block grants.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. ROBERTS. I yield to the gentleman from Texas, the distinguished 
ranking minority member.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I associate myself with the 
gentleman's remarks and endorse his remarks in opposition to the 
amendment.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Texas for his 
comments, and I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. HOSTETTLER. Mr. Chairman, I yield 3 minutes to the distinguished 
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sam Johnson.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of 
the gentleman's amendment to block grant food stamps back to the 
States, and I understand that the chairman of the committee really says 
that he wants to do that, but he did not do it, and I believe this is a 
very important amendment because it will complete the historic 
transformation of the most disastrous, cruel, and mean-spirited and 
destructive Federal welfare system ever created. We owe it to the 
States, the counties, the local communities, and the people currently 
trapped in this system to pass this amendment. This amendment will 
ensure that the Governors and local officials have not just some, but 
all, of the tools they need to create real solutions to serious 
problems facing their communities. Without this amendment our work here 
is actually incomplete.
  I remember when we first began the task of designing solutions to end 
the welfare bureaucracy. We agreed the best thing we could do for the 
truly needy Americans was to return control of all major programs back 
to the States. We agreed on this approach because the current system 
run by Washington is broke, it does not work. I cannot understand why 
we would now turn around and say, ``Well, block grants are good, but 
not for food stamps.'' That is what I just heard. If local control is 
the solution for school lunches, family nutrition and child protection, 
which we believe it is, then it must also be the answer for reforming 
food stamps. The Governors need and deserve all the flexibility we can 
give them to solve the problems that they understand best. I say to my 
colleagues, ``To only give them two-thirds of the tools they need is 
like playing golf without a putter. You can't finish.''
  Two committees I served on stood fast, and fulfilled their promise 
and passed out a tough, but fair welfare bill. Despite all the 
Democratic rhetoric, I strongly support and believe in the block grant 
proposals contained in this bill, but I cannot believe the Committee on 
Agriculture caved in to the big farm lobbyists and failed to fulfill 
their Contract With America. By doing this they have put our entire 
effort at real reform at risk. This system was designed by the 
Governors and the Congress as an integrated system that works 
simultaneously, together. It was to work as one, each section 
supporting the next. This is why it is so important we pass this 
amendment.
  Let us get back to the State authority that our U.S. Constitution 
demands, Mr. Chairman. The Governors would not need and deserve nothing 
less than full welfare reform.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the 
distinguished gentleman from Missouri [Mr. Volkmer].
  Mr. VOLKMER. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to point out to the 
members of the committee that this amendment, when offered by the 
gentleman from Indiana in the Committee on Agriculture, got a total of 
five votes, and yet the Committee on Rules has made it in order while 
the amendment offered by the gentlewoman from Florida, which is very 
important to correct the thrifty food plan provision under this bill, 
got 18 votes. It was not made in order by the Committee on Rules.
  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to point out to my colleagues how this 
Committee on Rules of the majority is operating, giving an amendment 
that has no chance at all a chance, and yet would not give a good 
amendment a chance.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the concern and the sense of frustration 
of the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sam Johnson, who spoke here just a 
moment ago, and, as I tried to indicate, in regard to the policy 
options that we considered in the <strong>House</strong> Committee on Agriculture there 
were four. The first option that was suggested by the gentleman from 
Indiana was obviously supported by the gentleman from Texas in terms of 
his remarks, and we offered the Governors a block grant, and we said, 
``What do you want? Here are the coupons. Here is the Food Stamp 
Program.''
  They said, ``Thank you, but no thank you. We don't want to administer 
the Food Stamp Program. We want the tax, 27 billion dollars' worth.''
  Well, with all due respect, Richard Nixon is no longer President, and 
we do not have any revenue to share.
  So then we said, ``OK, you can't have the cash. That really wouldn't 
be responsible. But you can have the coupons.''
  They said, ``We don't want the coupons.''
  That may give my colleagues a little indication as
   to what they would do with the cash.
  So then we considered a 40-60 split, and if you give them the 40 
percent, and that amounts to the people on food stamps that are also on 
welfare, and we wanted to have one-stop service, streamline it, bring 
the cost down.
  But the 60 percent on the other side would have grown. That is about 
a $6 billion expenditure, and we could not afford that. So we decided 
to do what we tried to do for decades, years, and that is establish 
food stamp reform. And we have done that, and we have a good bill.
  I remind everyone on this floor that not one farm lobbyist came to 
this chairman and this committee and indicated that we should cave in 
in regards to food stamp reform. I am tired of hearing it, and it is 
not accurate. And the Committee on Agriculture measured up to its 
responsibility, and we have a fine food stamp reform package. If the 
package were considered a year ago, it would have been incredible in 
this <strong>House</strong> of Representatives.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the 
gentlewoman from Florida [Mrs. Thurman].
  Mrs. THURMAN. Mr. Chairman, when it comes to the question of block 
granting food stamps, I want to commend the responsible and thoughtful 
leadership of the gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] and the gentleman 
from Missouri [Mr. Emerson] who both understand what a bad idea this 
is. The amendment was voted down 37 to 5 in the Committee on 
Agriculture just a few weeks ago.
  The notion that without block grants States are powerless against 
Federal 
 [[Page H3615]] bureaucrats is pure fiction. Block granting the food 
stamp program would place a terrible burden on States and take food out 
of the mouths of hungry children and the elderly.
  The big difference with block grants is in that the programs are no 
longer entitlements, so in a slump States would no longer get a 
automatic boost in Federal aid. They would have to cut benefits or, 
more likely, place newly unemployed on waiting lists. Longer-term 
recipients would keep their benefits as would people with steady job 
histories, but those with a little bad luck would suffer.
  This proposal would put hard-working families with children on 
waiting lists for food, just when they need it the most. It would 
actually put long-term recipients ahead of people with short-term 
needs. I thought we wanted to decrease long-term dependence.
  The Deal substitute recognized that State flexibility is important, 
but that welfare reform will fail if States do not have the proper 
resources for State programs. The Deal plan provides States with 
flexibility to respond to economic downturns and increases in child 
poverty.
  I would like to have my name associated with the chairman's remarks 
on the farm. Not one farmer came to me. Children came to me about this.
  Mr. HOSTETTLER. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the distinguished 
gentleman from Georgia [Mr. Barr].
  Mr. BARR. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, when I looked at the amendment of the distinguished 
colleague from Indiana, Mr. Hostettler, I asked myself certain 
questions. I asked do we want a program that is streamlined? I said to 
myself, yes. I said do we want a program that is consistent? I said to 
myself, yes. I asked do we need a program that reduces fraud? I said 
yes. I said do we want a program that requires the dignity of work by a 
recipient that is able, and I said yes. More important, my constituents 
said yes to each and every one of those questions.
  I think this is a very well thought-out amendment, I think it is 
consistent with what we are doing here, and it has an added bonus of 
reducing the power of bureaucrats which I think is good, my 
constituents think is good, and the recipients of this important 
program think is good.
  I rise in strong support of my distinguished colleague from Indiana's 
amendment.
  Mr. HOSTETTLER. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I would like to first state the reason why the 
Committee on Rules most probably ruled this amendment in order was 
given the fact the recent CNN-USA Today-Gallop Poll says that 60 
percent of Americans believe the budget deficit should be cut by 
cutting food stamps. Not by reducing the increase in spending in food 
stamps, and not even by freezing the expenditures in food stamps as 
this amendment calls for, but by cutting food stamps. Sixty percent of 
Americans believe we have got to return to fiscal responsibility by 
reducing this program.
  In conclusion, the staff of Governor Pete Wilson of California 
contacted our office today and said that this amendment was vital to 
the total welfare reform that must happen on the State level. It gives 
the States the ability and the capability to have real welfare reform 
on the local level.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the distinguished 
gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Pastor], a valued member of the committee.
  Mr. PASTOR. Mr. Chairman, I rise today to help set the record 
straight and talk about the actual cuts that the WIC Program would 
suffer under the Republican welfare proposal. To begin, the <strong>House</strong> has 
just passed a $25 million rescission to the WIC Program. Is this cut 
not to be considered a cut just because it was voted on separately? 
Second, under a block grant approach, WIC would be competing with other 
programs for funding and only 80 percent of its funds would be 
guaranteed for WIC-like services. Yet, how can we in good conscience 
say that WIC will not be cut when we are drastically cutting the other 
programs in its block grant? Is the remaining 20 percent that might be 
diverted to another program not to be considered a cut? Or, more to the 
point, if the child and adult care feeding program and the summer food 
program are cut, will that not lead some States to shift funds around 
to meet the various competing needs? What guarantees will we have to 
assure that funds for this program will be there when needed?
  Lastly, I want to clarify how WIC funds are spent. To begin, WIC 
dollars are not spent on items such as disposable diapers, as was 
alleged last night on the floor of the <strong>House</strong>. Expenditures under WIC 
are used to promote good nutrition and to encourage eligible persons to 
participate in this program. To fulfill the spirit of the block grant 
approach, States have already been given some latitude in the 
administration of this program. States have the
 option of approving food items to meet the specific nutritional needs 
of a particular population group which may have certain nutritional 
deficiencies. This way, nontraditional foods may be permitted to meet 
these identified needs. The principal point to remember, though, is 
that WIC vouchers are used exclusively on nutritional products. Are we 
now switching the terms of the debate to say that States should not 
determine how to best encourage mothers and children to participate in 
this program? I would admonish this body to seek a modicum of 
consistency as we move forward with the year's legislative agenda.


                         parliamentary inquiry
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary inquiry.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state it.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, is it the Chair's understanding that as 
the designee of the chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means, I can 
move to strike the last word?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman has that right. If the gentleman is 
asking unanimous consent to combine it, he would have 6\1/2\ minutes 
remaining.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I move to strike the last word, and I ask 
unanimous consent to merge that additional time with the time I am 
currently controlling.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Kansas?
   There was no objection.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  Mr. Chairman, again I want to say that I am rising in reluctant 
opposition to the amendment of the gentleman from Indiana. The intent 
of the amendment is to move immediately in regard to block grants to 
the States. The intent of the amendment is good. The bill as passed by 
the committee gives us the opportunity to do that once States can 
demonstrate they meet the criteria of an EBT program. So we are not at 
odds. It is merely a timing issue.
  I would also like to add, in a calmer tone, that this perception that 
somehow the Committee on Agriculture did not address true food stamp 
reform is simply not accurate. I would like to stress again that no 
farm organization, no commodity group, no lobbyists in regard to the 
food chain, no one in the agriculture community, that I am aware, 
called the chairman in reference to changing any policy in regards to 
food stamp reform, whether it be a block grant or not.
  The decision reached by the committee was reached by determining 
serious policy options: Will it work, can we achieve the reform, can it 
be done in a timely basis.
  Now, I understand the blood pressure around this place in regards to 
the marching orders and the deadlines that have been suggested, not 
only with welfare reform but the entire Contract With America. There is 
nothing in the Contract With America, by the way, that specifies that 
block grants of cash be given to States. We are attempting, and I think 
we are actually achieving, true reform.
  Now, my good friend from Texas, the chairman emeritus of the <strong>House</strong> 
Committee on Agriculture, and others on the minority side, have 
characterized the food stamp reforms as something that we have done in 
regards to saving money to pay for tax cuts. We had this discussion all 
during our committee markup, and I want to repeat what I said then: The 
food stamp provisions of H.R. 4 in title IV are for the purpose of 
badly needed reforms. These reforms 
 [[Page H3616]] are to achieve policy changes, not to cut spending to 
pay for taxes.
  The Committee on Agriculture held extensive hearings, and let me just 
read again the provisions that are contained in this reform package. I 
want all sides to listen to this. I want all of the folks who have been 
so vocal on that side in regard to the tax cuts and all the Robin Hood 
statements that we have had in that regard, and I want everybody on 
this side over here who claims instant purity in regards to whatever 
this legislation should or should not be.
  We increase the penalties and procedures to curb the more than $3 
billion annually that is lost to waste, fraud, and abuse. We have not 
done that for years. We are doing it now. We are harmonizing the 
welfare reform in regards to AFDC and food stamp programs so that 
States can provide a more efficient one-stop service. Not only for the 
taxpayer, but for the user.
  In regards to the recipient, we have a promotion of real private 
sector work by requiring able-bodied individuals between 18 and 50 
years of age who have no dependents must work at least part-time now to 
be eligible for food stamps, called workfare, jobfare. It promotes the 
adoption of a new and more efficient technology within something called 
the electronic benefit transfer system.
  Finally, it takes the program off of autopilot that it has been on 
for years and years and years and years, to regain the control of the 
ballooning costs. This thing started about $1 million back in 1961. 
Four years later, we were up to $60 million. I remember the former 
chairman of the <strong>House</strong> Committee on Agriculture, Bob Poage said, ``You 
know, sometimes this is going to get to be expensive. We are going to 
get to real money here.''
  Ten years later, $4.6 billion. Today, $27 billion, in terms of cost. 
Ten years ago, 19.9 million people. Today, 27.3 million people. The 
economy went up, these costs went up, automatically. The economy went 
down, and that is the time the Food Stamp Program should work. Why, of 
course they continued to go up.
  So we have restored, as far as I am concerned, the congressional 
responsibility to at least come in and take a look at this with a 2-
percent increase every year, and with real reform, as suggested by the 
gentleman from Missouri [Mr. Emerson], in terms of adding $100 million 
in terms of the feeding programs to the homeless and the soup kitchens 
all around the country. Under these reforms there will be no more 
uncontrolled growth in costs. If there is a future need for funding, 
Congress will do its job, we will step up to that responsibility. No 
child will go hungry.
  So I think it a good reform package.
  Mr. EMERSON. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. ROBERTS. I yield to the gentleman from Missouri.
  Mr. EMERSON. Mr. Chairman, I want to associate myself with everything 
that the distinguished chairman of the Committee on Agriculture has 
just said, and to say to my conservative brothers and sisters that the 
bottom line here is accountability. The chairman stated that we offered 
the States the block grant in food stamps, which is the form in which 
the program now exists. You do have a much higher level of 
accountability with food stamps than you do with cash. Frankly, food 
stamps or cash are neither one any good, which is why we have the 
strong provisions in this act to move us toward an electronic benefit 
transfer system in which we will achieve the highest level of 
accountability.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, reclaiming my time, I thank the gentleman 
for his comments. There is sound policy for all of these reforms. It is 
time to stop building straw men and support the reform.
  Mr. de la GARZA. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, I join the gentleman from Kansas in opposition to this 
amendment. There was a novel and innovative block grant program called 
revenue sharing. It did not work. Besides, if you give 50 States the 
money, you will have 50 different programs. Is that streamlining?
  Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman 
from Texas [Mr. Stenholm].
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Texas is recognized for 45 seconds.
  (Mr. STENHOLM asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. SANDERS. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. STENHOLM. I yield to the gentleman from Vermont.
  Mr. SANDERS. Mr. Chairman, the chairman of the committee made a point 
when he said no child would go hungry. I believe he just said that.
  Does the chairman deny that in America today, with the highest rate 
of childhood poverty in the industrialized world, 5 million children 
are already hungry?
  Mr. STENHOLM. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to associate myself 
with the remarks of the chairman, the ranking member, and say that on 
the Hostettler amendment, I cannot believe that he would offer an 
amendment that reduces the work requirements. In a bill in which we 
have talked about work, this amendment would require recipients to work 
only 32 hours. The Deal substitute would require an average of 20 hours 
of work per week.
  With all of the rhetoric going on on this floor, how we would have 
entered in an amendment that was defeated 37 to 5 in the Committee on 
Agriculture, I cannot believe.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong opposition to Mr. Hostettler's 
amendment to block grant the Food Stamp Program and to freeze the 
spending level through fiscal year 2000. I believe it is very important 
that we maintain a very basic food safety net to ensure that children 
do not go hungry.
  The fact is that 82 percent of food stamp households contain children 
and 16 percent have elderly members. In addition, 92 percent of food 
stamp households have gross incomes at or below the Federal poverty 
level. Freezing the funding levels, therefore, will most heavily impact 
poor children and the elderly and will not account for major shifts in 
the economy.
  Not only does Mr. Hostettler's amendment threaten this safety net, it 
also weakens the current work requirement in the base bill. This 
amendment would require recipients to work only 32 hours in a calendar 
month, whereas, the Deal substitute would require an average of 20 
hours of work per week. The Deal substitute also provides funding for 
additional employment and training to help move people off welfare and 
into work.
  Finally, I would like to remind my colleagues of the discussion we 
had yesterday regarding the deficit reduction issue. Members from the 
other side of the aisle pointed out to me that the committees had 
spoken on deficit reduction provisions during the markup process. I 
resent that characterization since my substantive deficit reduction 
amendments were not allowed to be voted on. However, the sense-of-the-
committee resolution which stated savings should go to deficit 
reduction did unanimously pass the Agriculture Committee. On the other 
hand, I would like to point out that by a vote of 37 to 5, Members from 
both sides of the aisle in the Agriculture Committee rejected the 
Hostettler amendment. The committee has, in fact, spoken clearly on 
this issue.
  I urge the defeat of this amendment and support of a food safety net 
for children and the elderly.
  The CHAIRMAN. All time has expired.
  The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from 
Indiana [Mr. Hostettler].
  The question was taken; and the Chairman announced that the noes 
appeared to have it.
  Mr. HOSTETTLER. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, further proceedings on the 
amendment offered by the gentleman from Indiana [Mr. Hostettler] will 
be postponed.


                      ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, proceedings will now resume on 
those amendments on which further proceedings were postponed, in the 
following order: Amendment No. 21 offered by the gentleman from Ohio 
[Mr. Traficant]; amendment No. 25 offered by the gentleman from Indiana 
[Mr. Hostettler].
                   Amendment Offered by Mr. Traficant
  The CHAIRMAN. The pending business is the demand for a recorded vote 
on amendment No. 21 printed in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85 offered by the 
gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Traficant] on which further proceedings were 
postponed and 
 [[Page H3617]] on which the ayes prevailed by voice vote.
  Mr. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I withdraw my demand for a recorded vote.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Kansas [Mr. Roberts] withdraws his 
demand for a recorded vote, and the amendment is agreed to.
  So the amendment was agreed to.


                  Amendment Offered by Mr. Hostettler
  The CHAIRMAN. The pending business is the demand for a recorded vote 
on amendment No. 25 printed in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85 offered by the 
gentleman from Indiana [Mr. Hostettler] on which further proceedings 
were postponed and on which the noes prevailed by voice vote.
  The Clerk will redesignate the amendment.
  The Clerk redesignated the amendment.


                             Recorded Vote
  The CHAIRMAN. A recorded vote has been demanded.
  A recorded vote was ordered.
  The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were--ayes 114, 
noes 316, not voting 4, as follows:
                             [Roll No. 263]
                               AYES--114
     Archer
     Armey
     Bachus
     Baker (LA)
     Barr
     Bartlett
     Barton
     Bono
     Bryant (TN)
     Bunning
     Burton
     Chabot
     Chenoweth
     Christensen
     Chrysler
     Coble
     Coburn
     Collins (GA)
     Cox
     Crane
     Crapo
     DeLay
     Doolittle
     Dornan
     Duncan
     Dunn
     English
     Ensign
     Fawell
     Fields (TX)
     Flanagan
     Forbes
     Fox
     Funderburk
     Gallegly
     Gekas
     Geren
     Gilman
     Goodlatte
     Goodling
     Goss
     Graham
     Greenwood
     Gutknecht
     Hall (TX)
     Hancock
     Hansen
     Hefley
     Herger
     Hilleary
     Hoekstra
     Hoke
     Hostettler
     Hunter
     Hyde
     Inglis
     Istook
     Johnson, Sam
     Jones
     Kasich
     King
     Klug
     Largent
     Livingston
     Manzullo
     McCollum
     McCrery
     McInnis
     McIntosh
     Mica
     Miller (FL)
     Moorhead
     Myers
     Myrick
     Neumann
     Ney
     Norwood
     Paxon
     Petri
     Porter
     Portman
     Quillen
     Radanovich
     Ramstad
     Riggs
     Rohrabacher
     Roth
     Royce
     Salmon
     Sanford
     Scarborough
     Schaefer
     Seastrand
     Sensenbrenner
     Shadegg
     Shays
     Smith (MI)
     Smith (WA)
     Solomon
     Souder
     Spence
     Stearns
     Stockman
     Stump
     Talent
     Tate
     Taylor (MS)
     Taylor (NC)
     Thornberry
     Torkildsen
     Walker
     Wamp
     Weldon (FL)
     Zimmer
                               NOES--316
     Abercrombie
     Ackerman
     Allard
     Andrews
     Baesler
     Baker (CA)
     Baldacci
     Ballenger
     Barcia
     Barrett (NE)
     Barrett (WI)
     Bass
     Bateman
     Becerra
     Beilenson
     Bentsen
     Bereuter
     Berman
     Bevill
     Bilbray
     Bilirakis
     Bishop
     Bliley
     Blute
     Boehlert
     Boehner
     Bonilla
     Bonior
     Borski
     Boucher
     Brewster
     Browder
     Brown (CA)
     Brown (FL)
     Brown (OH)
     Brownback
     Bryant (TX)
     Bunn
     Burr
     Buyer
     Callahan
     Calvert
     Camp
     Canady
     Cardin
     Castle
     Chambliss
     Clay
     Clayton
     Clement
     Clinger
     Clyburn
     Coleman
     Collins (IL)
     Collins (MI)
     Combest
     Condit
     Conyers
     Cooley
     Costello
     Coyne
     Cramer
     Cremeans
     Cubin
     Cunningham
     Danner
     Davis
     de la Garza
     Deal
     DeFazio
     DeLauro
     Dellums
     Deutsch
     Diaz-Balart
     Dickey
     Dicks
     Dingell
     Dixon
     Doggett
     Dooley
     Doyle
     Dreier
     Durbin
     Edwards
     Ehlers
     Ehrlich
     Emerson
     Engel
     Eshoo
     Evans
     Everett
     Ewing
     Farr
     Fattah
     Fazio
     Fields (LA)
     Filner
     Flake
     Foglietta
     Foley
     Ford
     Fowler
     Frank (MA)
     Franks (CT)
     Franks (NJ)
     Frelinghuysen
     Frisa
     Frost
     Furse
     Ganske
     Gejdenson
     Gephardt
     Gibbons
     Gilchrest
     Gillmor
     Gonzalez
     Gordon
     Green
     Gunderson
     Gutierrez
     Hall (OH)
     Hamilton
     Harman
     Hastert
     Hastings (FL)
     Hayes
     Hayworth
     Hefner
     Heineman
     Hilliard
     Hinchey
     Hobson
     Holden
     Horn
     Houghton
     Hoyer
     Hutchinson
     Jackson-Lee
     Jacobs
     Jefferson
     Johnson (CT)
     Johnson (SD)
     Johnson, E. B.
     Johnston
     Kanjorski
     Kaptur
     Kelly
     Kennedy (MA)
     Kennedy (RI)
     Kennelly
     Kildee
     Kim
     Kingston
     Kleczka
     Klink
     Knollenberg
     Kolbe
     LaFalce
     LaHood
     Lantos
     Latham
     LaTourette
     Laughlin
     Lazio
     Leach
     Levin
     Lewis (CA)
     Lewis (GA)
     Lewis (KY)
     Lightfoot
     Lincoln
     Linder
     Lipinski
     LoBiondo
     Lofgren
     Longley
     Lowey
     Lucas
     Luther
     Maloney
     Manton
     Markey
     Martinez
     Martini
     Mascara
     Matsui
     McCarthy
     McDade
     McDermott
     McHale
     McHugh
     McKeon
     McKinney
     McNulty
     Meehan
     Meek
     Menendez
     Metcalf
     Meyers
     Mfume
     Miller (CA)
     Mineta
     Minge
     Mink
     Molinari
     Mollohan
     Montgomery
     Moran
     Morella
     Murtha
     Nadler
     Neal
     Nethercutt
     Nussle
     Oberstar
     Obey
     Olver
     Ortiz
     Orton
     Owens
     Oxley
     Packard
     Pallone
     Parker
     Pastor
     Payne (NJ)
     Payne (VA)
     Pelosi
     Peterson (FL)
     Peterson (MN)
     Pickett
     Pombo
     Pomeroy
     Poshard
     Pryce
     Quinn
     Rahall
     Rangel
     Reed
     Regula
     Reynolds
     Richardson
     Rivers
     Roberts
     Roemer
     Rogers
     Ros-Lehtinen
     Rose
     Roukema
     Roybal-Allard
     Rush
     Sabo
     Sanders
     Sawyer
     Saxton
     Schiff
     Schroeder
     Schumer
     Scott
     Serrano
     Shaw
     Shuster
     Sisisky
     Skaggs
     Skeen
     Skelton
     Slaughter
     Smith (NJ)
     Smith (TX)
     Spratt
     Stark
     Stenholm
     Stokes
     Studds
     Stupak
     Tanner
     Tauzin
     Tejeda
     Thomas
     Thompson
     Thornton
     Thurman
     Tiahrt
     Torres
     Torricelli
     Towns
     Traficant
     Tucker
     Upton
     Velazquez
     Vento
     Visclosky
     Volkmer
     Vucanovich
     Waldholtz
     Walsh
     Ward
     Waters
     Watt (NC)
     Watts (OK)
     Waxman
     Weldon (PA)
     Weller
     White
     Whitfield
     Wicker
     Wilson
     Wise
     Wolf
     Woolsey
     Wyden
     Wynn
     Yates
     Young (AK)
     Young (FL)
     Zeliff
                             NOT VOTING--4
     Chapman
     Hastings (WA)
     Moakley
     Williams
  Messrs. BASS, KIM, BERMAN, and DICKEY changed their vote from ``aye'' 
to ``no.''
  Mrs. MYRICK and Messrs. BARTLETT, CRANE, COX of California, HEFLEY, 
PORTER, MOORHEAD, RAMSTAD, DORNAN, PETE GEREN of Texas, TAYLOR of 
Mississippi, FOX of Pennsylvania, and RIGGS changed their vote from 
``no'' to ``aye.''
  So the amendment was rejected.
  The result of the vote was announced as above recorded.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 26 printed 
in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.


                     amendment offered by mr. blute
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mr. Blute:
       Page 37, after line 21, insert the following:
       ``(11) Denial of assistance for fugitive felons and 
     probation and parole violators.--
       ``(A) In general.--A State to which a grant is made under 
     section 403 may not use any part of the grant to provide 
     assistance to any individual who is--
       ``(i) fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or 
     confinement after conviction, under the laws of the place 
     from which the individual flees, for a crime, or an attempt 
     to commit a crime, which is a felony under the laws of the 
     place from which the individual flees, or which, in the case 
     of the State of New Jersey, is a high misdemeanor under the 
     laws of such State; or
       ``(ii) violating a condition of probation or parole imposed 
     under Federal or State law.
       ``(B) Exchange of information with law enforcement 
     agencies.--If a State to which a grant is made under section 
     403 establishes safeguards against the use or disclosure of 
     information about applicants or recipients of assistance 
     under the State program funded under this part, the 
     safeguards shall not prevent the State agency administering 
     the program from furnishing a Federal, State, or local law 
     enforcement officer, upon the request of the officer, with 
     the current address of any recipient if the officer furnishes 
     the agency with the name of the recipient and notifies the 
     agency that such recipient is fleeing to avoid prosecution, 
     or custody or confinement after conviction, under the laws of 
     the place from which the recipient flees, for a crime, or an 
     attempt to commit a crime, which is a felony under the laws 
     of the place from which the recipient flees, or which, in the 
     case of the State of New Jersey, is a high misdemeanor under 
     the laws of such State, or is violating a condition of 
     probation or parole imposed under Federal or State law, or 
     has information that is necessary for the officer to conduct 
     the official duties of the office, that the location or 
     apprehension of the recipient is within such official duties.
       Page 37, after line 21, insert the following:
       ``(11) Denial of assistance for minor children who are 
     absent from the home for a significant period.--
       ``(A) In general.--A State to which a grant is made under 
     section 403 may not use any part of the grant to provide 
     assistance for a minor child who has been, or is expected by 
     a parent (or other caretaker relative) of the child to be, 
     absent from the home for a period of 45 consecutive days or, 
     at the option of the State, such period of not less than 30 
     and not more than 90 consecutive days as the State may 
     provide for in the State plan submitted pursuant to section 
     402.
        [[Page H3618]] ``(B) State authority to establish good 
     cause exceptions.--The State may establish such good cause 
     exceptions to subparagraph (A) as the State considers 
     appropriate if such exceptions are provided for in the State 
     plan submitted pursuant to section 402.
       ``(C) Denial of assistance for relative who fails to notify 
     state agency of absence of child.--A State to which a grant 
     is made under section 403 may not use any part of the grant 
     to provide assistance for an individual who is a parent (or 
     other caretaker relative) of a minor child and who fails to 
     notify the agency administering the State program funded 
     under this part, of the absence of the minor child from the 
     home for the period specified in or provided for under 
     subparagraph (A), by the end of the 5-day period that begins 
     with the date that it becomes clear to the parent (or 
     relative) that the minor child will be absent for such period 
     so specified or provided for.
       Page 235, after line 24, insert the following (and make 
     such technical and conforming changes as may be appropriate):
     SEC. 581. ELIMINATION OF FOOD STAMP BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO 
                   FUGITIVE FELONS AND PROBATION AND PAROLE 
                   VIOLATORS.
       (a) Ineligibility for Food Stamps.--Section 6 of the Food 
     Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2015), as amended by section 555, 
     is amended by adding at the end the following:
       ``(j) No member of a household who is otherwise eligible to 
     participate in the food stamp program shall be eligible to 
     participate in the program as a member of that or any other 
     household while the individual is--
       ``(1) fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or 
     confinement after conviction, under the laws of the place 
     from which he flees, for a crime, or an attempt to commit a 
     crime, which is a felony under the laws of the place from 
     which he flees, or which, in the case of the State of New 
     Jersey, is a high misdemeanor under the laws of such State; 
     or
       ``(2) violating a condition of probation or parole imposed 
     under a Federal or State law.''.
       (2) Exchange of Information With Law Enforcement 
     Officers.--Section 11(e)(8) of such Act (7 U.S.C. 2020(e)(8)) 
     is amended--
       (1) by striking ``and (C)'' and inserting ``(C)''; and
       (2) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the 
     following: ``, (D) notwithstanding any other provision of 
     law, the address of a member of a household shall be made 
     available, on request, to a Federal, State, or local law 
     enforcement officer if the officer furnishes the State agency 
     with the name of the member and notifies the agency that (i) 
     the member (I) is fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or 
     confinement after conviction, under the laws of the place 
     from which he flees, for a crime, or an attempt to commit a 
     crime, which is a felony under the laws of the place from 
     which he flees, or which, in the case of the State of New 
     Jersey, is a high misdemeanor under the laws of such State, 
     or is violating a condition of probation or parole imposed 
     under Federal or State law, or (II) has information that is 
     necessary for the officer to conduct the officer's official 
     duties, (ii) the location or apprehension of the member is 
     within the official duties of the officer, and (iii) the 
     request is made in the proper exercise of the duties, and''.
       Page 266, after line 15, insert the following:
     SEC. 606. DENIAL OF SSI BENEFITS FOR FUGITIVE FELONS AND 
                   PROBATION AND PAROLE VIOLATORS.
       (a) In General.--Section 1611(c) of the Social Security Act 
     (42 U.S.C. 1382(e)), as amended by section 601(b)(1) of this 
     Act, is amended by inserting after paragraph (2) the 
     following:
       ``(3) A person shall not be an eligible individual or 
     eligible spouse for purposes of this title with respect to 
     any month if, throughout the month, the person is--
       ``(A) fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or 
     confinement after conviction, under the laws of the place 
     from which the person flees, for a crime, or an attempt to 
     commit a crime, which is a felony under the laws of the place 
     from which the person flees, or which, in the case of the 
     State of New Jersey, is a high misdemeanor under the laws of 
     such State; or
       ``(B) violating a condition of probation or parole imposed 
     under Federal or State law.''.
       (b) Exchange of information with law enforcement 
     agencies.--Section 1631(e) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1383(e)) is 
     amended by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
       ``(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the 
     Commissioner shall furnish any Federal, State, or local law 
     enforcement officer, upon the request of the officer, with 
     the current address of any recipient of benefits under this 
     title, if the officer furnishes the agency with the name of 
     the recipient name and notifies the agency that--
       ``(A) the recipient--
       ``(i) is fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody of 
     confinement after conviction, under the laws of the place 
     from which the person flees, for a crime, or an attempt to 
     commit a crime, which is a felony under the laws of the place 
     from which the person flees, or which, in this case of the 
     State of New Jersey, is a high misdemeanor under the laws of 
     such State;
       ``(ii) is violating a condition of probation or parole 
     imposed under Federal or State law; or
       ``(iii) has information that is necessary for the officer 
     to conduct the officer's official duties;
       ``(B) the location or apprehension of the recipient is 
     within the official duties of the officer; and
       ``(C) the request is made in the proper exercise of such 
     duties.''.
       Amend the table of contents accordingly.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Massachusetts 
[Mr. Blute] and a Member opposed with each control 10 minutes.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I am reluctantly opposed to the amendment 
offered by the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Blute].
                        parliamentary inquiries
  Mr. SHAW. A parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state his parliamentary inquiry.
  Mr. SHAW. Mr. Chairman, I have noticed during the debate on at least 
one occasion, if not more, that a Member of this body has stood up to 
claim the time on the negative side of the amendment, and has not voted 
that way.
  Is it the Chair's interpretation that those who claim to be voting or 
are against the amendment must have every intention to vote against it, 
also?
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair must assume that the Member seeking the time 
in opposition intends at the time he seeks it to vote against it. It is 
not the Chair's intention to double check everyone's vote.
  Mr. VOLKMER. Mr. Chairman, a parliamentary inquiry.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman will state it.
  Mr. VOLKMER. Mr. Chairman, I am just curious if the gentleman from 
Florida [Mr. Shaw] could tell us the name of an individual who rose in 
opposition to an amendment and then did not vote that way.
  Mr. SHAW. Mr. Chairman, I will tell the gentleman privately, if he 
wishes to know.
  Mr. VOLKMER. I would like to know, Mr. Chairman.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, to extend debate, as the designee of the 
gentleman from Florida [Mr. Gibbons], I move to strike the last word 
and ask unanimous consent to merge that additional time with the time I 
am currently controlling.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair would ask, does the gentleman from Tennessee 
[Mr. Ford] intend to control the entire 15 minutes? Was that the 
gentleman's request?
  Mr. FORD. Yes, Mr. Chairman, it was.
  The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, the unanimous consent request is 
agreed to.
  There was no objection.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts 
[Mr. Blute].
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, the need for welfare reform in our country 
is obvious. The system is broken and it just does not work. There are 
aspects of our welfare system that are downright silly.
  Recently, many of us saw the movie ``The Fugitive,'' with Harrison 
Ford. In the movie, the fugitive gets financial help from a friend. 
However, a more real world scenario would have the taxpayer financing 
the fugitive's flight from justice, because that is exactly what is 
happening in the streets of America today.
  The truth is indeed stranger than fiction because in the real world 
fugitives do in fact go to the taxpayers to subsidize their life on the 
lam. Sting operations in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and other States have 
found anywhere from one-third to three-fourths of fugitive felons 
collecting welfare benefits. Last year, then Congressman and now 
Senator Rick Santorum and I introduced legislation to address this 
situation. This amendment, the Blute-Lipinski-Johnson amendment, is 
based on that bill and would solve this problem by doing two things.
  First, Mr. Chairman, it defines the term ``fugitive felon'' and cuts 
off benefits to those who fit the definition. Second, it forces Federal 
agencies to share certain information with law enforcement officials 
who request it, enabling them to better track down fugitives. Under 
present law, Federal social service agencies routinely deny information 
to the police regarding the whereabouts of criminals who have committed 
felonies and later fled justice, even though in many cases they are 
sending a check to the fugitive's 
 [[Page H3619]] new address. This amendment would end that scenario by 
requiring social service agencies that administer SSI, food stamps, and 
AFDC to turn off the spigot of free money once they are made aware that 
an individual is a fugitive felon. Presently there are about 392,000 
fugitive warrants on file at the National Crime Information Center. So 
if only 30 percent of this total is collecting an average welfare 
benefit package of $300 monthly, a very conservative estimate means 
that taxpayers could be shelling out almost $400 million annually. We 
have got to stop making crime pay.
  My amendment would take us a step closer to a smaller, more efficient 
welfare system that benefits those who truly need it.
  This legislation has been endorsed by the National Association of 
Chiefs of Police and the Fraternal Order of Police.
  Let's put an end to this taxpayer ripoff that allows criminals to 
benefit from the tax dollars of law-abiding Americans, and let's put an 
end to protecting these criminals from being thrown back into jail 
because our own government agencies are denying information about their 
location to law enforcement.
  Support the Blute-Lipinski-Johnson amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from 
Missouri [Mr. Volkmer].
  Mr. VOLKMER. I thank the gentleman from Tennessee for yielding me the 
time.
  Mr. Chairman, it is very apparent to me that on Tuesday night and 
then yesterday, we in this <strong>House</strong> have been presented with legislation 
which I would call as ugly as a sow's ear. They have tried yesterday 
and today to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear by trimming it on the 
edges.
  We first had the amendment by the gentlewoman from Connecticut to 
improve on the child care provisions. But just marginally. We had 
amendments by the gentleman from Oregon [Mr. Bunn] and the gentleman 
from New Jersey [Mr. Smith] in regard to unwed mothers under 18. We 
still have major problem, but it is just a marginal improvement.
  In the debate on the Johnson amendment, the gentlewoman from Utah 
said was real cruel to mothers to deny them child care. That is what 
the bill did when it basically came out of the committees. It still 
does, because it does not fully fund the child care, so it is still 
cruel but maybe not quite as cruel. It is still a sow's ear.
  We have adopted the Traficant amendment and the Upton amendment, and 
the Blute amendment is now before us and I am sure it will be adopted. 
But these, too, are just minor changes on the fringes. Still the 
problem remains, reducing school lunches, reducing food stamps for the 
working poor, the hungry kids, kicking people off welfare, actually, 
kicking them off programs that will help them so that they work 
themselves out of, not letting them have those programs.
  Seventy billion dollars in total cuts. Where is it going to go? Major 
corporations, going to go to the wealthy in tax cuts when we do the 
bill next week.
  It is still a sow's ear, folks, You have not made a silk purse out of 
this sow's ear. The only silk purse that is going to be here today in 
my opinion is the Deal substitute. If you want a silk purse, you vote 
for the Deal substitute. You have got a sow's ear.
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 4 minutes to the gentleman from 
Illinois [Mr. Lipinski], a coauthor of this amendment.
  Mr. LIPINSKI. Mr. Chairman, I am very proud to stand up and support 
this amendment. I believe this amendment is a silk purse amendment and 
not a sow's ear amendment. As you all know now, fugitives have been 
receiving welfare benefits. I found it hard to believe at first, but 
upon further investigation, I discovered that the Federal and State 
laws prohibited some welfare agencies from disclosing the addresses of 
recipients to law enforcement departments under the guise of 
confidentiality.
  Does America really want to protect the confidentiality of a 
fugitive? Do the American people want to support these people with 
their tax dollars? I doubt it very seriously.
  The amendment that we offer today not only ensures the exchange of 
information between police and welfare agencies but makes fugitives 
ineligible for benefits in the first place. Currently there is no 
provision in the welfare bill to prohibit States from passing 
confidentiality laws. Section 403(f) of H.R. 1214 says that the Federal 
Government may not regulate the conduct of States except to the extent 
expressly provided. We need to provide that, so no State shall hinder 
police in their search for fugitives.
  It is estimated that one-third of those running from the law are 
receiving welfare benefits. Yet, in some States it is impossible or 
next to impossible to track them down by going to the agency and asking 
for an address. Lieutenant Griffin of the Chicago Police Department 
told me that it is a tremendous benefit to be able to access public aid 
lists. It is the only spot they really go to, he said.
  The Federal Government has been just as guilty as the States in 
protecting the rights of criminals. Between the two, we have created a 
bureaucratic nightmare.
  For example, the Food Stamp Act expressly prohibits the release of 
information of recipients. And the States build on this nonsense by 
either denying access of data or making the process of receiving data 
too prohibitive.
  Another situation that I discovered is the inconsistency with which 
information is available. For example, in Illinois, police can access 
AFDC lists but not so food stamp lists. Depending on what kind of 
assistance someone receives depends on whether police can track them 
down. Does this make any sense? I do not think so.
  Access of information should be consistent regardless of the type of 
assistance someone is receiving. Let's set a Federal standard. You 
break the law, you do not receive benefits, and the police can use 
these public aid lists if need be.
  What will happen if this amendment does not pass? Fugitives will 
continue to receive welfare benefits and the police will not be able to 
track them down. Let's pass a little common sense. Let's pass the 
Blute-Lipinski-Johnson amendment today.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman from 
Vermont [Mr. Sanders].
  Mr. SANDERS. I thank the gentleman for yielding me the time.
  Mr. Chairman, let's introduce just for kicks, as we say, a note of 
reality into this debate. Welfare reform and the end of food stamp 
abuse, yes. Everybody is for that. Increased pain and suffering for 
America's children, no, many of us are opposed to that.
  A little while ago, the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture 
stated that under his reform, no child in America would go hungry. Who 
are we kidding?
  Today in America, before cutbacks to food stamps or to WIC or to 
other nutrition programs, 5 million children in the United States are 
hungry. Today, in this country, we have by far the highest rate of 
childhood poverty in the industrialized world. What kind of country are 
we when we are talking about more cutbacks for low-income kids, when we 
already have double the highest rate of childhood poverty in the 
industrialized world?
  Mr. Chairman, if we were serious about welfare reform, and I do not 
think we really are, but if we were, we would be talking about a 
Federal jobs program to create real jobs so that poor people could then 
have real work and earn a real income.
  If we were serious about welfare reform, we would be talking about 
raising the minimum wage so that when poor people work, they can escape 
from poverty, not abolishing the minimum wage as some would have.
  If we are serious about talking about welfare reform, we must talk 
about improving child care capabilities, so that children of working 
mothers and working families are provided for. If we are serious about 
talking about welfare reform, we must talk about job training and 
transportation so that welfare recipients are able to get to the jobs 
that are open for them.
  Last, today we are talking about welfare reform as it applies to the 
poor. I hope that in the future we will have the guts to talk about 
welfare reform as it applies to the rich and the multinational 
corporations.
  [[Page H3620]] I hope that we will say that the U.S. Government with 
its huge deficit and its enormous social problems can no longer afford 
to spend tens of billions of dollars a year providing tax breaks and 
subsidies to the rich and the large corporations. I look forward to 
that welfare reform.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from New 
York [Mr. Rangel], one of the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Ways and Means.
  (Mr. RANGEL asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Chairman, there has been a lot of concern about 
people calling each other mean-spirited and not being concerned about 
the welfare of children in this great country of ours. But also there 
has been a restriction that our Republican friends have, and, that is, 
a contract. That contract seems to be driving people to do things that 
are inconsistent with what they truly believe. What are they driving to 
do?
  The first drive, the jewel in the crown, is to cut back taxes. That 
is the driving force. That is the engine. Whether it is $780 billion 
over 10 years or $200 billion that we have to cut back in taxes now, 
not that we have heard the American people screaming for it, but I 
assume the wealthy people know what is best for them and I assume you 
work closer with them. But assuming that you have agreed and you are 
committed in your contract to turn back $200 billion in revenues, then 
you have that same strong commitment to balance the budget, indeed, 
change the Constitution. Once you have reached those conclusions, the 
tax cut and to balance the budget, the only thing left to do is to cut, 
cut, cut, cut. And where do you cut? Did you go to the strongest that 
have been enjoying the subsidies? No, you went to our aged, you went to 
our sick, you went to our children, and you charged it all up to the 
lack of discretion of the teenaged mother for making God's child 
without having a legal contract.
  How dare we in this body determine what a child should or should not 
have because of the lack of discretion of the mother? And how do we 
feel as federally elected legislators in saying we have messed up this 
program as Democrats, so our responsibility is to turn it over to the 
Governors, no strings attached? Oops, I made a mistake, there are 
strings attached.
  Do not show enough compassion to give cash assistance to anybody that 
has a child if they are 18 or younger and they are not married. Oops, 
another thing that had strings attached.
  If there is another child while you are on welfare, regardless of how 
it came or the conditions, the governors are restricted from giving 
cash assistance.
  Oh, there is another restriction. No matter what the economic 
conditions are in the locality where the recipient is, no matter how 
hard he or she tries to get a job, if no jobs are available, then we 
say the governors cannot give them cash assistance because the time has 
run out.
  I tell my colleagues this: If a political pundit had to find out how 
to win an election they would say go against affirmative action, go 
against immigrants, go against people who are poor, go against welfare, 
go against food stamps and make America feel that we have to reform the 
system. But then again, if you put that in a contract and you win, you 
can bet your life it is not enforceable, not in this great country it 
is not.
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Dallas, TX, Mr. Sam Johnson, one of the leaders of the welfare reform 
movement here in the Congress.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I say to the gentleman from 
New York [Mr. Rangel], I heard him yesterday talking about how we had 
left out our felons who were getting welfare, left them out. That is 
what we are talking about right now is an amendment to correct that and 
make it happen.
  The Deal bill does not even talk to that. In fact, it destroys any 
welfare reform that there is going.
  I cannot believe that our Federal Government actually pays with 
taxpayers dollars, I might add, welfare benefits to criminals who are 
fleeing prosecution from the law. I heard the gentleman say that.
  I would like to list for those who do not know the benefits criminals 
get while on the run: Criminals, criminals under current law can and do 
receive AFDC, SSI, and food stamps.
  Instead of giving benefits to those who truly are in need we are 
giving them to individuals who have broken the law and are trying to 
escape from it.
  The real question is why does this atrocity continue to happen. The 
answer is because current law prohibits Federal welfare agencies from 
sharing information with local law enforcement communities.
  What this means, if your local police officer calls the Federal 
welfare agency that administers those benefits and asks for the address 
of a known felon, that welfare agency by law is forbidden even from 
giving the most current address to the police.
  I cannot believe that this is happening in our country. It is just 
one more irritation that our police officers currently have to hurdle 
in their attempt to stop crime.
  This is simply outrageous. Whoever said crime does not pay never 
understood how Government bureaucracy works. I urge all of my 
colleagues and I hope the gentleman from New York [Mr. Rangel], too, 
will support this amendment and stop the flow of taxpayer dollars to 
criminals and allow welfare agencies to help our police officers fight 
the war on crime.
  Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield for the purpose of 
my support?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman's time has expired.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 10 seconds to the gentleman from New 
York [Mr. Rangel].
  Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Chairman, I would be glad to support this well 
thought out amendment to stop welfare payments from going to fugitives 
who are fleeing. The only thing I ask is, where does the fleeing 
fugitive apply for welfare?
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, may I inquire about how much time we have 
remaining?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] has 7\1/2\ 
minutes remaining and the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Blute] has 
1\1/2\ minutes remaining.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from North 
Dakota [Mr. Pomeroy].
  Mr. POMEROY. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding and I 
want to take this minute to talk about what I am for, what our caucus 
is for in terms of welfare reform.
  We are for a welfare reform package that is tough on work, that puts 
a work expectation for people receiving benefits.
  We are for a welfare reform package that enforces personal 
responsibility, particularly the personal responsibility for your 
children.
  Third, we are for a welfare reform package that does not punish kids 
because, for gosh sakes, it was not the kids that caused the problems 
we have with the present system.
  These are meaningful responses, meaningful reforms and they are 
represented in the Deal substitute. By contrast, the bill of the 
majority fails on all three counts, most particularly the work 
requirement.
  A Congressional Budget Office study put it on the front page of the 
Washington Post today talking about how States will fail under the GOP 
work rules.
  We need to make a work program work, and that is the Deal substitute. 
Please support it this afternoon.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from New 
York [Mr. Nadler].
  Mr. NADLER. Mr. Chairman, I simply rise to ask of the sponsors two 
questions: No. 1, the question of the gentleman from New York [Mr. 
Rangel]. If someone is a fugitive, how is it that we are paying him 
anything, since the definition of a fugitive is we do not know where he 
is and he is not declaring it because he is on the run from the law?
  The second question is: The meaning of the amendment, where it says 
that if a child, a second provision of the 
 [[Page H3621]] amendment that says if a child is absent for any length 
of time that you would not give the welfare to that family. My question 
is would you simply not give the welfare attributable to that child 
during the period of absence or for other children also who may be 
present in the home?
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. NADLER. I yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts.
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman, with regard to the first question, it is happening 
right now where fugitive felons are receiving welfare benefits and law 
enforcement agencies cannot get the information from social service 
agencies as to exactly who these people are or where they are.
  Mr. NADLER. Could the gentleman answer the second question?
  The CHAIRMAN. The time of the gentleman from New York [Mr. Nadler] 
has expired.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentlewoman 
from Texas [Ms. Jackson-Lee].
  Ms. JACKSON-LEE. Mr. Chairman, I thank my colleague from Tennessee 
for yielding the time.
  Mr. Chairman, let me say I do not think there is a person in the 
<strong>House</strong> and certainly not in this great country that would say that 
criminals are by and large the ones getting welfare. I did not know 
that 2- and 3-years-olds were criminals, so I would certainly be 
supportive of keeping criminal fugitives from getting welfare, but I am 
really here to talk about is what I stand for in terms of how to make 
this program really work and really be welfare reform.
  We have to have real welfare to work, we have to have a job creation 
program that is really sincere and offers to people the real 
opportunity to work. At the same time, we have to be sensitive to our 
infants and to our women and children, and I just want to emphasize 
that. We hear all of the talk about investment in the future and 
taxpayers' money. And ``I do not want to pay for those deadbeats.'' 
This is what an investment in our children is all about.
  Just take the Women, Infants and Children Program. We can see what we 
would save if we were participating in the Women, Infants and Children 
Program some $12,000 to $15,000 per child that we invested in making 
sure that women, infants and children had good nutrition programs.
  The Republican program does not have good nutrition programs, it does 
not focus on the child. It focuses on taking away from the child.
  Let us move forward to a progressive standard for all people and that 
is vote for the Democratic alternative. Let us make sure welfare reform 
is that and not welfare punishment.
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from North 
Carolina [Mr. Heineman], one Member who has had a real world experience 
with this issue, being a former police chief of Raleigh, NC.
  (Mr. HEINEMAN asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. HEINEMAN. Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of the Blute-
Lipinski-Johnson amendment. As a former police chief I can tell you 
that we need to crack down on the number of welfare recipients who 
become fugitive felons and are now collecting welfare benefits at the 
expense of the American taxpayer.
  Today there are almost 400,000 fugitive warrants on file at the 
National Crime Information Center--and it is estimated that one-third 
of those felons are receiving public assistance.
  What's even worse is that law enforcement officers are prevented by 
privacy laws and regulations from tracking down these wanted felons.
  Welfare and Social Security offices are prevented from telling law 
enforcement officials the whereabouts of a felon--even though they are 
sending him or her a Government check every month.
  This is outrageous and an affront to the American taxpayer. We need 
to crack down on this kind of waste and abuse of our current welfare 
system--and help our law enforcement officials. This amendment will 
correct this ridiculous situation.
  I urge my colleagues to support the Blute-Lipinski-Johnson amendment 
and I compliment my friend from Massachusetts for offering this 
amendment.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentleman from 
Pennsylvania [Mr. Fattah].
  Mr. FATTAH. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding time to 
me.
  Mr. Chairman, as a member of the Pennsylvania State Legislature in 
1987, I sponsored the Employment Opportunities Act. Democrats and 
Republicans got together in Pennsylvania and created a joint job 
training initiative and moved 200,000 people off of the welfare rolls, 
not by punishing them but by providing job training and child care, and 
transportation subsidies so they could get to a multitude of training 
programs and they work. We do not have to be mean-spirited if we want 
to help Americans by moving them toward self-sufficiency. It has worked 
in a number of States.
  It is unfortunate that the Republican majority thinks that the 
American people really do not understand. We have 9 million children on 
welfare, and they come to the floor talking about one set of abuses in 
Chicago with 19 children in which someone was not doing the right thing 
with the welfare check. Millions of families are doing what they should 
do with a welfare check, and that is helping children meet their needs 
every day and working and preparing for the moment in which they can be 
self-sufficient again in this land. We should be doing as much here in 
the U.S. Congress.
  The Preamble to the Constitution says it is our responsibility to 
promote the general welfare. This majority today in this Congress is 
not moving to promote the general welfare. It is really moving to pull 
the carpet up from under millions of Americans who need the help so one 
day they can be in a position to be tax producers rather than 
recipients of subsidies from the Government.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, under the rule I move to strike the last 
word.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
  It seems we always get distracted from the debate on the amendment at 
hand. But I must say the gentleman who just spoke in the well spoke of 
local answers to problems, and then he turns right around and says but 
do not give the States and the local communities more opportunity to do 
the kind of constructive job that he just spoke to.
  Ironic, because our plan does precisely that. It puts more resources 
in the hands of the communities and the States where real success can 
occur, not where you have payment. And one thing my friend from New 
York forgot to mention is what are we doing here; we are cutting off 
Federal bureaucrats. We forget to use them in his litany and yes, we 
are doing that and we are creating more flexibility.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. Does the gentleman from Massachusetts seek to yield his 
last one-half minute?
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I yield the remainder of our time to the 
gentleman from Chattanooga, TN [Mr. Wamp].
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Tennessee [Mr. Wamp].
  (Mr. WAMP asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. WAMP. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. 
Blute] and the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Archer] for yielding time to 
me.
  Mr. Chairman, to keep convicted felons from receiving Government 
welfare benefits is through my eyes a no-brainer. This amendment will 
fix an injustice in the current system that I believe no one wants.
  Mr. Chairman, no matter what side of the debate you fall on, I think 
you will agree that welfare dollars should not be spent on criminals, 
should not be spent on criminals who have successfully avoided the law. 
This is not the type of success we want to reward.
  While you may agree this is wrong, the gentlewoman from Texas thinks 
this does not happen very much. It is an exception that is costing the 
taxpayers an estimated $1 billion annually.
  [[Page H3622]] The American people are frustrated. Mr. Chairman, I 
urge my colleagues to support this amendment and close a disgusting 
loophole in the welfare bureaucracy.
  Two hundred years ago Benjamin Franklin said:
       I am for doing good to the poor, but I differ in my opinion 
     of the means. I think the best way of doing good for the poor 
     is not making them easy in poverty but leading them or 
     driving them out.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, could I inquire how much time is remaining?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] has 2\1/2\ 
minutes remaining, and the gentleman from Texas [Mr. Archer] has 3\1/2\ 
minutes remaining.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, do we reserve the right to close?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Tennessee has the right to close.
                              {time}  1615
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Blute].
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I thank the distinguished chairman for 
yielding and commend him for his great work on this welfare reform 
bill.
  We all know our welfare system is broken, that it needs to be fixed, 
that it creates dependency, victimization, and ultimately despair 
amongst our citizens, and we need to change that, and we need to 
tighten up the welfare system so it does what it is supposed to do.
  And one of those things should not be giving welfare benefits to 
convicted felons who are on the lam from the law. I have with me a 
number of letters from the parole board in my State where they have 
been rejected from getting information from social welfare agencies on 
the whereabouts of felons that the parole board is looking for.
  This is a system that is broken. It is wrong. It should not happen.
  I urge all of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to adopt this 
amendment, and let us restore some sanity to our welfare system.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Washington [Mr. McDermott], a very distinguished spokesman on welfare 
reform in this Nation, one who has been very active in this debate.
  Mr. McDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, the fundamental difference between the 
Democrat and the Republican approach to what we do about welfare is 
what you believe is the fundamental problem. If you beat on people, 
they will go to work; that is what Republicans believe.
  Now, if this bill were in effect in 1982 when Ronald Reagan, and we 
had that big sweep and we were close to the wall, the unemployment rate 
in the State of Washington was 12.1 percent. The national unemployment 
rate was 9.6 percent. The Bureau of Labor Statistics says the 
underemployment rate in the country at that time was 16.5 percent, and 
in the State of Washington it was 20 percent. That includes those 
people who were involuntarily working part-time and discouraged 
workers.
  Now, when you say you are going to take a 16-year-old kid and drive 
them out into the street by taking away the money for their kid and 
that somehow they are going to magically find a job when there is 20 
percent of the people unemployed or underemployed in the State of 
Washington, you simply live in a dream world.
  This is a bad bill.
  Mr. ARCHER. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.
  Mr. Chairman, we have got to try to separate rhetoric from fact in 
this debate. It is very difficult to do.
  When we talk about the supposed reductions in whether WIC or school 
lunches or whatever it might be, we are not talking about cuts at all. 
We are talking about increases of dollars based on the current level.
  But from the Democrat side of the aisle, they think only Federal 
entitlement programs dictated in a straitjacket with Federal 
bureaucrats administering with pounds and pounds of regulations are the 
only way that you get help to people who need help. Just the reverse.
  And as far as work habits or work requirements are concerned, you can 
go to Massachusetts or Virginia, and you can go to States today that 
are putting people on work as a condition of welfare within 60 days. 
That is what we want all of the States to be able to do, and we want to 
get through with this waiver process and these pounds of papers that 
have to be filed that take money away from really going to those who 
need help.
  That is why we have got an outstanding welfare reform approach, and 
it is why the Democrat substitutes will not do the job.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of my time.
  Mr. Chairman, no one wants to see fugitives receive welfare in this 
country. You know, it is really amazing to see what the Republicans are 
doing and saying about children in this country. The Los Angeles 
opinion page on Sunday said that: ``Congressional Driveby: Gang-bangers 
Kill Innocent Kids. Republicans Just Kill Programs To Help Kids.'' And 
to quote the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Shaw], who is the chairman of 
the subcommittee, and the source is the Congressional Record of March 
22, he said, ``We are talking about children you would not want to 
leave your cat with over the weekend,'' or you hear what the 
gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson], who serves on the 
Committee on Ways and Means, says, ``It is not hard to clothe your 
kids, folks. Just go to the secondhand store to do so.''
  The Republicans are so mean to kids in this welfare reform package 
just for the sole purpose of giving the well-to-do rich of this Nation 
a huge tax cut.
  Mr. HEFNER. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. FORD. I yield to the gentleman from North Carolina.
  Mr. HEFNER. I do not think felons should get welfare.
  But the numbers just do not add up, Mr. Chairman. If you are going to 
get $69 billion over 5 years to pay for a tax cut, somebody is going to 
get cut.
  Bureaucrats are bureaucrats whether in North Carolina or Washington, 
DC, or North Dakota or wherever they are. You are not cutting out 
bureaucrats. You are going to cut $69 billion worth of benefits to the 
most vulnerable people in these United States to give a tax cut to the 
wealthiest people in this country, and that is what you said in your 
contract, and that is what you are trying to live up to. So why not 
brag about it?
  The CHAIRMAN. All time has expired.
  The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Blute].
  The amendment was agreed to.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 30 printed 
in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.
                    amendment offered by mr. salmon
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mr. Salmon: Page 387, after line 10, 
     insert the following:
     SEC. 768. LIENS.
       Section 466(a)(4) (42 U.S.C. 666(a)(4)) is amended to read 
     as follows:
       ``(4) Procedures under which--
       ``(A) liens arise by operation of law against real and 
     personal property for amounts of overdue support owed by an 
     absent parent who resides or owns property in the State; and
       ``(B) the State accords full faith and credit to liens 
     described in subparagraph (A) arising in another State, 
     without registration of the underlying order.''.
       Amend the table of contents accordingly.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. 
Salmon] will be recognized for 10 minutes, and a Member opposed will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  Does the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] seek the time in 
opposition?
  Mr. FORD. Yes, I do, Mr. Chairman.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] will be 
recognized for 10 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Salmon].
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself 2 minutes.
  Mr. Chairman, delinquent parents can no longer be allowed to shirk 
their responsibilities and expect the Government to act in their place. 
That is unfair to the child. It is unfair to the taxpayer. It is time 
we sent a message if you bring a child into this world that you are 
going to care for it. This is the 
 [[Page H3623]] compassionate and sensible thing to do for our Nation's 
children.
  In child support cases, liens are not used by States to their full 
potential. Upon locating property, many caseworkers still prepare 
individual liens and seek judicial approval for each case. This is a 
slow and ineffective process, and our Nation's children are the ones 
that are paying for it.
  Our amendment makes it easier for States to collect or for States to 
issue liens to collect past-due support and to help each other collect 
child support debts by providing that child support liens are 
enforceable across State lines without going to court again unless 
contested. Past-due support in all cases already becomes a judgment by 
operation of law.
  Many States support this amendment. In fact, just about every State 
we have talked to wants this amendment. This is not an unfunded 
mandate. In fact, the States will save money by this measure, and the 
Nation's children will benefit.
  America cannot work unless its citizens take more responsibility for 
their own actions. It is time that parents fulfill not only their own 
emotional but also their financial obligations to their children. We 
can at least address the financial obligations in this body.
  Mr. Chairman, this amendment has widespread support from the national 
child support enforcement advocates. Marilyn Smith, president of the 
National Child Support Enforcement Association, has campaigned 
tirelessly for the reforms in this amendment, and Jerri Jensen, 
president and founder of Aces, whose story was told this week in the TV 
movie ``Abandoned and Deceived,'' says that irresponsible parents 
should not be able to profit from selling out-of-state property while 
their children suffer due to lack of court-ordered child support.
  Child support enforcement is a vital component of welfare reform. 
Delinquent parents can no longer be allowed to shirk their 
responsibilities and expect the Government to act in their place. That 
is unfair to the child, and unfair to the taxpayer. It is time we sent 
the message that if you bring a child into this world, you must care 
for it. This is the compassionate and sensible thing to do for our 
Nation's children.
  The national collection rate of child support payments is abysmal. 
Regularly received collections average 18 percent in the United States. 
In my State, Arizona, the rate is only 10 percent, and even in the best 
States it reaches only as high as 27 percent. For this reason we have 
decided to adopt child support enforcement measures as part of the 
Welfare Reform legislation we promised in our Contract With America. 
The States will achieve a better collection rate though these 
provisions and thus lower costs to the States and Federal Government, 
who are left to provide the full financial care for children of 
delinquent parents.
  States are already required to use liens to collect past-due support 
but do not use this remedy to its full potential. Upon locating 
property, they prepare individual liens and must go back to court for 
each case, which is burdensome and slows the process significantly. 
Thus deadbeat parents can indulge in luxury items such as boats and 
fancy cars, buy real estate, make investments, etc., while their 
children are left to endure life's hardships with not only the 
emotional, but also the financial support of only one parent. Most 
often the mothers are left with this heavy burden, and are forced to 
look to the State and Federal Government for a helping hand. Abandoning 
parental responsibility can no longer be tolerated if this country is 
to survive, and the Government should not bear the burden of deadbeats 
anymore.
  The Salmon-Waldholtz-Torkildsen amendment is a simple, 
straightforward approach to the problems States are currently 
experiencing in collecting past-due support. It states that liens will 
arise by operation of law, which means that processing the thousands of 
delinquent cases will be much easier and cheaper by avoiding return 
visits to court. For example, since 1992, Massachusetts has issued 
administrative liens in every case where a noncustodial parent owed 
more than $500--liens to more than 90,000 child support delinquents 
with property as varied as workman's compensation claims, wages, bank 
accounts, and real estate. All were handled by computer on a wholesale 
rather than retail basis, collecting more than $13 million.
  Not only has the collection process been difficult within a State, it 
is even more so when delinquent parents cross State lines to thwart 
efforts to track them down and collect. Although 30 percent of all 
child support cases are interstate, only 10 percent of all dollars 
collected originate from out-of-State. For example, if a deadbeat dad 
from Arizona moves to Utah to avoid supporting his children, currently 
it is extremely difficult to recover the money he owes across State 
lines. Under our amendment, if the lien is sent to another State to 
attach property owned in that State, it can be filed by the State 
agency in the second State without going to court to get accepted as a 
lien issued in that State. Again, this simplifies the process and thus 
it will be vastly easier for States to collect even across State lines. 
Arizona, Massachusetts, and Utah have come out in support of this 
amendment and other States have expressed great interest in such 
procedural changes.
  The sections of the welfare reform bill that were reported out of the 
Committee on Ways and Means--primarily those sections dealing with 
child support enforcement reform--go far in solving the collection 
problems experienced at the State level. However, the Salmon-Waldholtz-
Torkildsen amendment is fundamental to the successful reform of the 
system, according to child support associations and State agencies 
across the Nation. The National Child Support Enforcement Association, 
a leader is the reform movement, has called this amendment the basis 
for every other enforcement mechanism in this legislation. Time is of 
the essence in our efforts to end the cycle of dependency while 
ensuring the well-being of our children.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Neal], one of the distinguished members of the 
Committee on Ways and Means and who handled an amendment similar to 
this, if not the same amendment, before the committee.
  Mr. NEAL of Massachusetts. Mr. Chairman, I think one of the most 
significant options in this debate has been how a well-organized 
minority can, indeed, move the majority. I remind the listeners today 
and the viewing audience that there was no child support initiative 
offered by the Republican majority in this <strong>House</strong> until we convinced 
them that there should have been a strong child support component. I 
offered a similar amendment to this during the Ways and Means markup, 
and it was turned down on a party-line vote.
  The gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Torkildsen], to his credit, had 
contacted my office and asked me to offer this amendment. It has the 
support of Bill Clinton and Bill Weld. I think that this goes to the 
heart of personal responsibility, paying for the children that you 
have.
  During the Ways and Means Committee markup I offered an amendment to 
the child support enforcement title to include the use administrative 
liens to collect past-due child support. This amendment failed on a 
party line veto.
  Now this amendment has bipartisan support. Congressman Salmon and 
Congresswoman Waldhotz are cosponsors of this amendment. This amendment 
is something both President Clinton and Governor Weld agree upon.
  This is the type of amendment which should have bipartisan support. 
Under current law, a child support payment becomes a judgment by 
operation of law as it becomes due and unpaid and entitled to full 
faith and credit. This provision takes existing law one step further 
and allows States in interstate cases to move and to levy and seize 
assets without registering the underlying order in the sister States, 
unless the lien is contested on grounds of mistake of fact. Because the 
lien arises by operation of law, unlike current practice, which is 
``case-by-case.'' It gives similar treatment in interstate cases to 
liens as has been already accorded to interstate income withholding 
order since 1984. An estimated one third of delinquent obligors own 
property eligible for a lien. With approximately 3.5 million delinquent 
support cases nationwide, that equals a million or more liens, easy to 
issue and transmit by computer, impossible to write by and send by 
hand.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from 
Louisiana [Mr. McCrery].
  Mr. McCRERY. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  I want to commend the gentleman from Massachusetts for his efforts in 
committee and here on the floor to adopt this. As I told him during the 
committee, it was new to me. I just had to look at it, and a number of 
us have, and we are going to support it.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 15 seconds to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Neal], a member of the Committee on Ways and Means.
  Mr. NEAL. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the gentleman from Louisiana 
[Mr. McCrery]. I think that the gentleman from Louisiana [Mr. McCrery] 
is an example of how this bill could have been accomplished in a 
bipartisan manner. From day 1, he indicated a willingness to work with 
the minority party to get a good, sound bill done, and his mind was 
always open in this debate.
  I thank the gentleman for his kind words.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Torkildsen].
  Mr. TORKILDSEN. Mr. Chairman, nearly 2 years ago, a constituent of 
mine--Susan Brotchie, a divorced mother and president of Advocates for 
Better Child Support--met with me and requested that I work on 
legislation to address the issue of delinquent parents hiding their 
assets in real property, and thus avoiding child support payments. Out 
of that meeting was born H.R. 1029 and the substance of this amendment.
  Let us face it. Child support enforcement will only be truly 
effective if we enforce cases across State lines. It is also important 
that we reduce the burden placed on parents left with little or no 
means of support. It is cost prohibitive for a parent whose children 
need support to chase a delinquent parent from State to State, hire 
lawyers, and wade through multiple State judicial systems.
  This amendment attacks the interstate problem at its core by allowing 
States to give full faith and credit to liens placed in other States. 
It saves Federal and State taxpayer money, while leaving in tact all 
State enforcement procedures. This amendment improves existing law; it 
does not create new, unfunded mandates on the States.
  My home State of Massachusetts remains a leader in the fight to make 
delinquent parents accountable. Since 1992, Massachusetts has issued 
administrative liens in every case where a parent owed more than $500. 
Massachusetts also set up reciprocal agreements with neighboring 
States, so that liens placed in Massachusetts are given full faith and 
credit in Vermont. These reforms have resulted in a 29-percent increase 
in child support collections in the last 3 years--a compliance rate 
that has risen from 51 to 60 percent--and 10,000 more families 
receiving support. Expanding this model nationwide would boost the rate 
of compliance in interstate cases up to 70 percent.
  By not passing this amendment, we are endorsing the safe havens that 
currently exist for parents who own property in other States. This 
Congress must send a powerful message to delinquent parents: You can no 
longer enjoy the benefits of property and luxuries in other States and 
not fulfill your fundamental commitment to our children.
  Welfare reform will only be complete if we boost compliance in 
interstate cases. Fewer children and single parents will turn to public 
assistance, making this amendment is win-win-win situation--a win for 
children, a win for custodial parents, and a win for taxpayers.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Meehan], who is a former prosecutor.
  Mr. MEEHAN. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of this amendment. This 
is a actually a very, very good amendment to a very bad bill.
  We have been doing a lousy job in this country of holding people 
accountable when they have children. Mr. Chairman, as a prosecutor in 
Massachusetts, I prosecuted a case, the first criminal enforcement case 
in child support in Massachusetts under the revised statute. It was a 
defendant who was married, lived in Lowell, MA. This defendant took off 
to New York. He had 7 children at home. The bank began foreclosure 
procedures because the wife could not make payments. He was living in 
New York City, on 52d Street, and he had a place in the Caribbean.
  The child support enforcement division in Massachusetts could not get 
at any of the assets.
  We could do a much, much better job of collecting child support. 
State agencies do not have the ability to do long-arm statutes, go out 
and collect these assets. We could save $32 to $35 billion if we could 
just collect child support.
  By the way, 90 percent of the money that is owed in child support in 
this country is men who owe women child support. I cannot help but 
think that if 90 percent of the money was women who owed men, this 
system would have found out a way to collect these payments.
  This bill is part of a bill I supported and sponsored. It is long 
overdue. I would hope we could get something done to increase the 
effort to hold people accountable when they have children. We are doing 
a lousy job at it now.
  Massachusetts, as my colleague indicated, is a leader in this area.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from 
New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema].
  (Mrs. ROUKEMA asked and was given permission to revise and extend her 
remarks.).
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding, and I 
want to extend my congratulations to our colleague, the gentleman from 
Arizona. This is a wonderful amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, I speak now as the first person back 10 years ago who 
brought the issue of child support, and the national disgrace it had 
become, before our Congress.
  We have had two reforms. I hope this third reform that is implicit in 
this bill--because child support enforcement is welfare reform--that 
is, his amendment, we will be recognizing that no child support system 
is any better than the individual States. So we have reached into the 
States. This is an interstate system, and we have to have reciprocity.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, before I yield additional time, in order to 
extend debate, as the designee of the gentleman from Florida [Mr. 
Gibbons], I move to strike the last word and ask unanimous consent to 
merge that additional time with the time I currently control.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Tennessee?
  There was no objection.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from New 
York [Mr. Nadler].
  Mr. NADLER. I thank the gentleman for yielding this time to me.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of this amendment which requires the 
States to adopt procedures under which liens may be imposed 
automatically against the property of persons who are delinquent in 
child support payments in another State, and also of the next amendment 
providing for suspension of drivers and professional licenses for child 
support delinquencies.
  The nonpayment of child support is an urgent public crisis that 
compromises the economic security of a very large number of American 
children and families. In 1994, more than half the children living in 
single-parent families were poor, and the majority, the large majority 
of them were in families where the child support payments were 
delinquent.
  Before I came to this <strong>House</strong>, I was the author of bills in the New 
York State Legislature which allowed for liens to be placed against the 
property of persons who were delinquent in their child support payments 
and which provided for suspension of drivers and professional licenses 
of delinquent payors.
  The lien bill passed and resulted in a large increase in child 
support collections in New York.
  The amendments before us today would improve the collection of child 
support in an area where we have serious collection difficulties, 
interstate collections. Interstate child support cases comprise 30 
percent of all child support cases and a very large fraction of the 
failures of collection.
  The effective child support enforcement helps many single-parent 
families make the move to independence, self-reliance. This approach 
has succeeded in New York, and it will improve the lives of single 
parents and their children across the country.
  This amendment will let absent parents know we are serious about 
collecting due child support. It will contribute to improving the 
economic conditions of children and families and will 
 [[Page H3625]] lessen the number of families forced to go on welfare 
to survive.
  I urge my colleagues to support this amendment and the next amendment 
as two very worthy amendments to what is, unfortunately, a very bad 
bill but which will improve that bill significantly.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Illinois [Mr. Weller].
  (Mr. WELLER asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. WELLER. I thank the gentleman from Arizona for yielding this time 
to me.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of the Salmon-Waldholtz-
Torkildsen amendment, which further strengthens the essential child 
support enforcement provisions contained in the ``Personal 
Responsibility Act,'' our Republican welfare reform initiative.
  It is unconscionable that 30 percent of dead-beat parents are able to 
shirk their responsibilities to their children because they reside in a 
different State than their children. In fact, in Illinois, little 
children were stiffed to the tune of $176.1 million in 1994 due to 
dead-beat parents who refused to meet their responsibility to their own 
flesh and blood. This has got to stop.
  Provisions in H.R. 4 go a long way toward solving this problem, and 
this amendment works hand-in-hand with these improvements by providing 
a simple, straightforward method of processing interstate collection. 
It simply allows liens on personal property filed in one State to be 
honored in a second State without having to go back to court, thereby 
avoiding unnecessary delays and judicial red-tape. It is better for the 
child and the taxpayer.
  Abandoning parental responsibility can no longer be tolerated--and 
the Personal Responsibility Act, with this amendment, brings us one 
step closer to providing America's children with the inherent parental 
support they need and deserve.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, may I inquire as to how much time remains?
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Salmon] has 4 minutes 
remaining and the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] has 9 minutes 
remaining.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from 
Florida [Mrs. Meek].
  Mrs. MEEK of Florida. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for 
yielding this time to me.
  Mr. Chairman, the debate on this floor regarding welfare reform has 
been, in my opinion, as far from what is real in the real world as 
anything I have ever seen. I have heard what a lot of you call 
rhetoric. I have heard a lot of theoretical aspirations from many of 
you.
  Many of you would not know a welfare mother if you saw her. Not only 
would you not know her, but you do not know how they live. You do not 
know what it takes to feed their children. You do not know what it 
takes to find a job.
  You talk about getting jobs. Leaving the jobs out of the bill and not 
having a full track to find a job, it is not easy to find a job. Most 
people on welfare will not work. I have not seen in any of these bills 
any way that would lead to a job.
  So all we are talking about here is vapor, vapor that does not really 
go any place. And we are looking at children in a very cruel way.
  There is no mistake about it. Our welfare system needs to be 
improved. We all know that. But do we have to improve it by taking food 
out of children's mouths? Do we have to improve it by taking away the 
welfare help we are giving States now? You are talking about States' 
rights, but you are not giving them the autonomy they need. On the one 
hand you say here is autonomy; on the other hand you take away the 
money. Does that make sense? It does not work. If you want the States 
to do something with welfare reform, then give them the same amount of 
money you gave them before.
  I stand here today to say to you that all of this is a bunch of 
baloney. It does not lead down to the neighborhoods where the people 
are poor and need help. All this about wearing second-hand clothes, 
where have you heard of such a mess before? Wearing second-hand 
clothes? It goes to show you where the mindset is. How can you make an 
amendment if you do not have the right mindset?
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to my distinguished 
colleague, the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Clement].
  Mr. CLEMENT. I thank the gentleman for yielding this time to me.
  Mr. Chairman, once you get past all the rhetoric, you are left with 
just the facts. And the facts are that H.R. 4 does not fund its 
requirements.
  Translation--H.R. 4 passes on a huge unfundated mandate to States, 
cities, counties and localities.
  Just yesterday President Clinton signed the unfunded mandate 
legislation into law. During the debate and in the days which have 
passed since we sent this legislation on, many on the other side have 
been beating their chest and talking about how they saved our States, 
cities, and American taxpayers from the evils of the Federal 
Government. And now, before the President's signature is even dry we 
are being asked to support the mother of all unfunded mandates.
  But do not just take my word for it. A letter from the United States 
Conference of Mayors ``* * * H.R. 4 will further strain local budgets. 
It basically shifts costs our way. We can expect general assistance 
expenditures to skyrocket in those states which provide it * * *''.
  The League of Cities had this to say about H.R. 4, ``The bill could 
be one of the greatest mandates ever imposed upon our communities.''
  And from a report issued today by the Congressional Budget Office on 
H.R. 4, ``the literature on welfare-to-work programs, as well as the 
experience with the JOBS program indicates that States are unlikely to 
obtain such high rates of participation.'' And June O'Neil, the 
Director who was recently installed by the Republican leadership said 
that ``given what is known about how these programs work, I was 
comfortable signing'' the report. ``We did this totally based on the 
evidence.''
  Support the only responsible welfare reform bill. Protect your States 
and cities. Support the Deal substitute.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I am a little confused. I have not found 
that the gentlewoman from Florida or the gentleman from Tennessee have 
been--they have been going on and on--and I do not find any of this 
information in the Salmon-Waldholtz-Torkildsen amendment.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair would inform the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. 
Salmon] that the Chair has been reasonably lenient because about 75 
percent of the conversation has not been on the appropriate amendment.
  Mr. SALMON. I am baffled. We seek child support enforcement.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from Florida [Mr. 
Scarborough].
  Mr. SCARBOROUGH. I thank the gentleman for yielding this time to me.
  Mr. Chairman, I will actually speak on the Salmon amendment. I am a 
strong supporter of it. I have been listening to this debate for a 
week, ``Help the children, the children, the children; you are mean-
spirited.'' All you talk about is children, children. We finally have a 
bill before us, an amendment that will help children without increasing 
the Federal bureaucracy. It is about time. We have deadbeat dads going 
from State to State, running away from child enforcement authority, and 
here is a great idea. We can help children without funding a huge 
bureaucracy. The argument all week has been, ``You have got to vote 
more money, throw more money at a problem that we have not been able to 
solve for the past 30 years, by making bureaucracies larger. And if you 
are not for huge bureaucracies, then you are against children.'' That 
is garbage, and everybody here knows it is garbage.
  That is the great thing about the Salmon amendment: It finally helps 
us do it without increasing the size of bureaucracy.
  Let us cut down on deadbeat dads running away from their 
responsibility, and do it without creating a huge Federal bureaucracy.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, for the purpose of debate I yield 1\1/2\ 
minutes to the gentleman from California [Mr. Becerra].
  Mr. BECERRA. I thank the gentleman from Tennessee for yielding the 
1\1/2\ minutes.
  [[Page H3626]] Mr. Chairman, we would like to discuss just this one 
particular amendment. The problem is that on a lot of these small 
amendments that we see, when you take a look at the entire bill, what 
we have is a beast. And whether you put lipstick on it or not, it is 
still an ugly beast. It is difficult to talk just about one little 
aspect of this entire debate when the beast is out there hovering over 
your shoulders.
  What we find in this entire debate is the fact that we are talking 
about cuts, cuts to kids, cuts to school lunch programs. And for what? 
We found out very clearly in an amendment that passed yesterday. These 
are cuts on kids, cuts on school lunch programs so that we could pay 
for cuts for tax breaks, cuts for the wealthy. That is what we are 
driving toward.
  Billions of dollars will be saved, saved by cutting from kids and 
cutting from school lunch so we can send it over to give tax breaks for 
the wealthy. That is what this is all about. That is our concern.
  But we have to talk about this entire legislation, not just about one 
particular amendment, because this is going to affect the entire 
country, not one individual.
  So let us remember, when we start voting on these particular 
amendments, whether you are voting to pass it or not, you cannot 
improve the looks of a beast by putting some lipstick on it. I hope 
that we understand that, ultimately, the folks who are going to suffer 
at the hands of this beast are not the folks in this room, not the 
people that got elected, but the people who voted to elect us to 
office. That is, the children and the families who will suffer because 
school lunch programs will not be there and day care will not be 
there--all because Republicans wanted to give tax cuts to the rich.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, let me inquire as to how much time the 
Democrats would have and whether or not we reserve the right to close 
on this particular issue.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] has the right 
to close, and he has 4 minutes remaining.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I would like to also know whether or not my 
colleagues on the other side of the aisle will request the additional 5 
minutes and if so, how will we handle that in the closing?
  Mr. SALMON. Yes, we will request the additional 5 minutes.
  Mr. FORD. Then I will yield to the gentleman.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, as the designated 
representative for Mr. Archer, I move to strike the last word.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman is entitled to 5 minutes on his pro forma 
amendment and, without objection, may control that time.
  There was no objection.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. I thank the Chair, and I yield to the 
gentleman.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself 1 minute.
  Mr. Chairman, I am a little bit baffled. It seems that we are hearing 
that this amendment somehow benefits the rich. I am getting a little 
bit confused. Actually this amendment hurts the rich deadbeat dads and 
it helps the children that are not getting their child support, and I 
would really appreciate if we can understand that cogent point and stay 
on point.
  I would like to point out, Mr. Chairman, how this amendment came 
about. It did come up in the Committee on Ways and Means. It was not 
successful. I think it should have been there. I will agree that it 
should be a bipartisan effort, and I am happy to say I believe now it 
is. The gentlewoman from Utah [Mrs. Waldholtz] and the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Torkildsen] and I put our heads together and came up 
with this idea. The gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr. Torkildsen] has 
been working on this issue for the last couple of years, and it is an 
important issue, not only to American families, but children 
everywhere.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair would like to inquire from the gentleman from 
Texas, [Mr. Sam Johnson] whether he is going to control the 5 minutes 
or if he is yielding the control of the 5 minutes to the gentleman from 
Arizona.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. I will maintain control of the time, Mr. 
Chairman.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentlewoman from Maryland 
[Mrs. Morella].
  Mrs. MORELLA. Mr. Chairman, I just think that this amendment makes a 
great deal of sense. Here we are talking about child support 
enforcement, and I can tell my colleagues that for instance in my State 
of Maryland $500 million plus is in arrears, and only $300 million has 
been aid.
  I say to my colleagues, Now, if you're going to have this amendment 
in order, this means that, if somebody from Maryland has a deadbeat 
parent who may be in Florida in a marvelous palazzo which has been 
purchased, this will allow her to be able to put a lien, have a lien 
put on, that property in order to help to support the children that 
have been parented by both of them.
  I think it makes a great deal of sense. Current law allows the 
imposition of liens by processing orders through the judicial system, 
but it is really a very difficult, if not impossible, process for an 
out-of-State parent to utilize. So this bill would eliminate such a 
system. It would order states to give full faith and credit to any lien 
imposed by another State in the pursuit of child support collection. 
When we cannot collect child support by utilizing all the means that we 
have available, and this is a means that is available, then taxpayers 
pay, and children, children, suffer.
  So, Mr. Chairman, I certainly urge strong support of this amendment.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Massachusetts [Mr. Blute].
  Mr. BLUTE. Mr. Chairman, I want to commend the authors of this 
amendment, including my colleague from Massachusetts. Our State has 
taken the lead on this issue. Governor Weld and his Lieutenant Governor 
Salucci believe this is absolutely essential to any welfare reform, 
but, speaking of all the States, I say to my colleagues, If you look 
around this country, and look at Massachusetts, and Wisconsin, State 
after State have engaged in stronger welfare reform than we're talking 
about here. The States are way ahead of this Congress in tightening up 
and changing this welfare system, and we better get our act together 
here, and pass this amendment and pass this bill so we can do what we 
said we're going to do, and reform our welfare system and catch up to 
all those State governments out there.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the 
gentlewoman from Utah [Mrs. Waldholtz].
  Mrs. WALDHOLTZ. Mr. Chairman, this is an amendment designed to help 
make parents meet their moral and legal responsibility to support their 
children. In our mobile society, many parents evade their child support 
obligations simply by moving to another State. Thirty percent of 
delinquent child support cases involve parents who have moved to 
another State, while the families they left behind suffer.
  The bill we are debating today includes strong new measures to 
enforce child support orders and track down deadbeat parents. But, we 
can make a good provision even better with this amendment.
  The Salmon-Waldholtz-Torkildsen amendment will help ensure that when 
a State issues a child support order, the debt can be collected 
regardless of where the noncustodial parent lives or owns property. 
This amendment streamlines the process of collecting past due child 
support by allowing liens to attached to property automatically, 
without registration of the original child support order in the State 
in which the deadbeat parents' property is located. All 50 States allow 
some sort of lien to arise automatically, by operation of law. This 
amendment will not require States to significantly chance their laws, 
but does require that liens for past due child support be accorded this 
most simplified kind of enforcement to avoid the expense and time of 
registering liens in various jurisdictions.
  The Salmon-Waldholtz-Torkildsen amendment is not an unfunded mandate 
and it does not alter State law regarding lien priority. The amendment 
 [[Page H3627]] does not impose additional costs on the States. What it 
does do, is simplify the procedure for enforcing valid child support 
orders and does away with the current incentive for irresponsible 
parents to move out of State to try to dodge their obligations.
  The bill is supported by the National Child Support Enforcement 
Association, the Association for Children for Enforcement of Support, 
and by my home State of Utah which is well-known for objecting to 
Federal mandates.
  Nothing in our society is more simple than a parent's duty to support 
their child. This simple amendment will make it easier to enforce that 
duty against parents who ignore it.
  I urge my colleagues to support the Salmon-Waldholtz-Torkildsen 
amendment.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 20 seconds to the gentleman from 
North Carolina [Mr. Hefner].
  Mr. HEFNER. Mr. Chairman, I want to congratulate the gentleman on an 
excellent, excellent amendment. I wish he had had more input into this 
very bad bill, but I support it strongly. I think it is the one bright 
spot in this terrible bill.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the distinguished 
gentleman from Wisconsin [Mr. Obey].
  Mr. OBEY. Mr. Chairman, I think this is a good amendment, but, as Ann 
Richards, Governor of Texas, said, ``Just because you dress up a pig, 
that doesn't mean it still isn't a pig,'' and that is what this bill 
is.
  I think we are going to make the same mistake that this Congress made 
a long time ago under President Nixon. President Nixon worked hard. He 
got through this <strong>House</strong> on a bipartisan basis a sweeping welfare reform 
bill, and then, when it went to the Senate, it got killed because it 
was crunched between extreme conservatives on one side and extreme 
liberals on the other side. And so this country went for years without 
welfare reform.
  Now I am afraid we are going to see the same thing. I think we are 
seeing in this <strong>House</strong> the chances of this bill becoming law being 
destroyed by the extremism of those who are supporting the committee 
Republican bill. I do not think the public wants us to pursue ideology. 
I do no think they want us to pursue our pet theory of social 
engineering. I think the public wants us to focus on how to move people 
on welfare to work; that ought to be the sole question. They want to 
know what works in the real world.
  It seems to me that the crucial difference between the Deal amendment 
and the base bill which we are debating is that the Deal amendment is 
more real. It deals with real world situations. It will move more 
people into the world of work. The committee bill tries to do that on 
the cheap. It is not going to work. It will fail the basic 
responsibility that we have to the American people.
  So, Mr. Chairman, I would urge us to support the Deal amendment when 
we get the opportunity.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may consume to the 
gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Stump].
  (Mr. STUMP asked and was given permission to revise and extend his 
remarks.)
  Mr. STUMP. Mr. Chairman, I rise to express my concern over title VII 
subtitle G section 459(h)(1)(A)(ii)(V) of H.R. 1214, which would permit 
garnishment of veterans disability compensation. While I support the 
bill, I oppose the particular provisions regarding garnishment of VA 
disability compensation.
  Mr. Chairman, there is an alternative to garnishment. VA has long had 
a process known as apportionment, which accomplishes essentially the 
same result as garnishment. As directed by 38 CFR 3.451, VA can 
apportion disability benefits by considering the:
       Amount of VA benefits payable; other resources and income 
     of the veteran and those dependents in whose behalf 
     apportionment is claimed; and special needs of the veterans, 
     his or her dependents, and the apportionment claimants. The 
     amount apportioned should generally be consistent with the 
     total number of dependents involved. Ordinarily, 
     apportionment of more than 50 percent of the veterans benefit 
     would constitute undo hardship--on the veteran, while 
     apportionment of less than 20 percent of the benefits would 
     not provide a reasonable amount for any apportionee.
  I would like to work with my distinguished colleague, Mr. Archer, 
chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means, to ensure the interests of 
the disabled veterans and their dependents are protected. As chairman 
of the Veterans' Affairs Committee, I intend to review VA's 
apportionment authority under chapter 53 of title 38.
  There is a good reason to retain the current method of apportioning 
VA disability pay. That is the presence of a disability which impairs 
the earning power of the veteran. There is an agency which is best 
suited to judge the fairness of an application for apportionment; an 
agency with the most knowledge of the case, and that is the VA.
  Children of disabled veterans do not suffer because the authorities 
are unable to locate the veteran to enforce child support or alimony 
orders. A disabled veteran who receives a disability benefit must have 
a mailing address.
  There is a long history of special treatment of disability payments 
to veterans. They are tax-exempt. They have generally been safe from 
garnishment.
  I believe disabled veterans should meet their parental obligations 
whenever they are financially able to do so.
  In 1994, there were approximately 22,729 cases in which VA 
apportioned compensation or pension benefits.
  There is a system in place--the VA and its authority to apportion. I 
hope my concerns can be addressed as this measure moves through the 
Senate and into conference.
  Mr. SALMON. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Maryland [Mr. Bartlett].
  Mr. BARTLETT of Maryland. Mr. Chairman, from the other side of the 
aisle we have heard a lot of comments during the debate on this 
amendment about taking food out of the mouths of children. I would just 
like to observe that this amendment, colleagues, does exactly the 
opposite of that. It puts food in the mouths of children because this 
is an amendment that has to do with parental responsibility, with 
deadbeat dads and occasionally, perhaps, a deadbeat mom. But this is a 
bill that does exactly the opposite of what they are accusing it of not 
doing. This amendment puts food in the mouths of children, and the 
debate during this time ought to be focused on this amendment. I am 
very pleased that the last two speakers on that side of the aisle did 
admit, after all of the diatribe before, that this, in fact, was a good 
amendment and should be supported, and I support it, too.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 10 seconds to the gentlewoman from 
Colorado [Mr. Schroeder].
  Mrs. SCHROEDER. Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out that we are 
glad these amendments are bringing this bill up to the level of the 
Deal bill, and that is all we are talking about here.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from 
Florida [Ms. Brown].
  (Ms. BROWN of Florida asked and was given permission to revise and 
extend her remarks.)
  Ms. BROWN of Florida. Mr. Chairman H.R. 4 is a big failure. H.R. 4 
does not create a single job. It is reform in name only. It cuts the 
school lunch program. It cuts resources for child care. It cuts health 
care. It cuts transportation. It cuts the tools that make a difference 
in whether someone keeps a stable job or ends up back on welfare.
  Haste makes waste. Republicans are in a hurry to pay for the tax 
breaks for the rich at the expense of hungry children, the elderly and 
veterans. Once the sound bites are over, the American people will 
realize that the contract ``with'' is a contract ``on.''
  Shame, shame, shame, Republican shame.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise today in support of the Mink substitute which 
will transform the AFDC program into a program that will really move 
people from welfare to work.
  The Mink substitute significantly increases the funding for 
education, job training, employment services, and child care for 
welfare recipients. These components are essential to any program to 
help people move into the work force. This amendment helps to make sure 
that States move people off of welfare and into real jobs.
  H.R. 4 is a bad bill. It is a mean-spirited bill because it does not 
provide the tools needed to help people work and lift themselves out of 
poverty. Yes, we need real reform that helps people get off welfare for 
good and helps them to take care of their own families. But H.R. 4 does 
not create a single job. It repeals the main job training program even 
though education and job training are the keys off welfare. This bill 
is a big failure; it is reform in name only:
  It cuts resources for child care.
  It cuts health care.
  It cuts transportation.
  [[Page H3628]] It cuts the tools that make the difference in whether 
someone keeps a stable job or ends up back on welfare.
  I urge my colleagues to support the Mink substitute to improve this 
bad bill that the majority has shamelessly rushed through the <strong>House</strong>.
  Shame, shame, shame on the Republicans.
  The Republican bill is just part of a bigger GOP plan to rush bad 
legislation through so Americans won't see the fine print in the 
Contract on America.
  Haste makes waste. Republicans are in too much of a hurry to pay for 
tax breaks for the rich at the expense of hungry children, the elderly, 
and veterans. Once the sound bites are over, the American public will 
realize that this slash and burn lawmaking will only hurt the most 
vulnerable in America.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of 
my time.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sam 
Johnson, for 1\1/2\ minutes.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I would like to point out for 
starters that Ann Richards is the ex-Governor of Texas. I believe Mr. 
George Bush is the Governor down there now by acclamation.
  I might add that the Deal bill, which my colleagues have been talking 
about at length all day, is really the Clinton deal, phony deal, bill. 
Let me just say that it does not talk to any of the issues that we have 
been discussing. Our bill is totally more substantive than that. It 
talks to fugitives that are in food stamps. It talks to the food 
stamps. It talks to the kids.
  Mr. Chairman, with the amendments we have we have a far stronger bill 
than the Deal bill, the Clinton deal, phony deal, bill ever thought of 
being. As a matter of fact, the Clinton deal is an unfunded mandate on 
the States. Medicaid transitional assistance is increased from 1 year 
to 2 years. States must provide additional Medicaid benefits which, 
according to CBO, the Deal bill, the Clinton deal, phony deal, bill 
will cost the States an additional $1.5 billion between now and the 
year 2000.
  Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself the balance of the time.
  Mr. Chairman, as my colleagues know, the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. 
Salmon] mentioned earlier that the Democrats are talking about the bill 
in general and not talking about the amendment that is before the 
Congress today. I would say his amendment was offered in the full 
committee. We tried, as Democrats, in every way to perfect the bill at 
the subcommittee level and the full committee level. We debated this 
particular amendment. We debated the next amendment that will be on 
this <strong>House</strong> floor. Democrats voted for this amendment in the full 
committee, Republicans voted no against both amendments in the 
Subcommittee and full committee.
  Better still, the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Shaw] indicated to us 
that we would have an opportunity to bring this particular amendment on 
child support enforcement to the full committee. We thought these 
provisions would have been in the bill. They were not included in the 
bill. Plus, the Democrats tried to go before the Committee on Rules 
with 104 Democratic amendments. We wanted to perfect this bill on the 
<strong>House</strong> floor. The Republicans are denying the Democrats an opportunity 
to perfect the bill. We think the Deal substitute is the right answer 
to this welfare issue before this <strong>House</strong> today.
  The CHAIRMAN. All time has expired.
  The question is on the amendment offered by the gentleman from 
Arizona [Mr. Salmon].
  The question was taken; and the Chairman announced that the ayes 
appeared to have it.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I demand a recorded vote.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, further proceedings on the 
amendment offered by the gentleman from Arizona [Mr. Salmon] will be 
postponed.
  The CHAIRMAN. It is now in order to consider amendment No. 31 printed 
in <strong>House</strong> Report 104-85.


                   amendment offered by mrs. roukema
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I offer an amendment made in order under 
the rule.
  The CHAIRMAN. The Clerk will designate the amendment.
  The text of the amendment is as follows:
       Amendment offered by Mrs. Roukema:
       Page 387, after line 10, insert the following:
     SEC. 768. STATE LAW AUTHORIZING SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
       Section 466(a) (42 U.S.C. 666(a)), as amended by sections 
     715, 717(a), and 723 of this Act, is amended by adding at the 
     end the following:
       ``(15) Authority to withhold or suspend licenses.--
     Procedures under which the State has (and uses in appropriate 
     cases) authority to withhold or suspend, or to restrict the 
     use of driver's licenses, professional and occupational 
     licenses, and recreational licenses of individuals owing 
     overdue support or failing, after receiving appropriate 
     notice, to comply with subpoenas or warrants relating to 
     paternity or child support proceedings.''.
  The CHAIRMAN. Pursuant to the rule, the gentlewoman from New Jersey 
[Mrs. Roukema] and a Member opposed will each control 10 minutes.
  Does the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] seek control of the time 
in opposition?
  Mr. FORD. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I do.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema] will be 
recognized for 10 minutes, and the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Ford] 
will be recognized for 10 minutes.
  The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema].
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield myself such time as I may 
consume.
  Mr. Chairman, the provisions of this bill go far. With the last 
amendment, with the provisions in the bill, we are probably 90 percent 
close to closing this circle, the circle of loopholes that have existed 
in law regarding interstate child support enforcement. I hope that we 
can close that full circle.
  I do not know whether or not we can this year, but for my colleagues 
who do not have the background, I want you to know this has been a 10-
year effort with two major reforms, and now I would hope that in the 
interests of the children, and in the interests of the taxpayers, that 
we recognize that we have to deal firmly and strongly with this 
national disgrace of child support enforcement and the deadbeats.
  The amendment before us is very straightforward. States must have in 
place a program of their own design and choosing that provides for the 
revocation, suspension, or restriction of driver's licenses, 
professional and occupational licenses, and recreational licenses for 
deadbeat parents. We are talking, remember, about wilful violation, 
repeated wilful violation of legal child support orders.
  As we debate this amendment today, I want to point out that we as 
Republicans have referred to the States as the laboratories of 
democracy, and here we can learn in this amendment exactly how 
effective States have been in terms of leading the way on effective 
child support enforcement. These reforms have saved taxpayers millions 
of dollars in a relatively very short time.
  By the way, there are at least 19 States, and some say closer to 25, 
that already have these kinds of measures on the books. For example, 
the State of Maine has been a leader in this respect and has come to be 
known for its effectiveness in terms of using the prospect of losing a 
license. They have collected multiple millions of dollars in very short 
time, less than a year, in delinquent child support payments, and they 
have only had to suspend, believe it or not, 41 licenses. The State of 
California has had a very similar experience. They have collected $10 
million in a short time and have not revoked even one single license. I 
think what it shows is when the law means business, deadbeat parents 
miraculously come up with the money which they swore was not available.
  Effective child support enforcement reforms are an essential 
component of true welfare prevention. Research has been conducted by 
various groups, whether it is Columbia University or the Department of 
Health and Human Services, that show up to 40 percent of mothers on 
public assistance would not be on welfare today if they were receiving 
the legal support orders to which they are legally and morally 
entitled.
  It is a national disgrace, as I have said before. Our child support 
enforcement system continues to allow the 
 [[Page H3629]] most obvious things to go on and people are neglecting 
their children, their moral obligations, and their legal obligations. 
Make no mistake about it: If we close this circle and close the 
loopholes, as we are about to do today, the so-called enforcement gap, 
the difference between how much child support can be collected and how 
much child support is actually collected, has been estimated 
conservatively at $34 billion.
  Perhaps the most salient fact we must keep in mind as we seek to 
improve our system is that our interstate system is only as good as its 
weakest link. States that have been enforcing and collecting child 
support payments that have given it a priority are penalized by those 
States who fail to reciprocate. That is precisely why we need 
comprehensive reform, to ensure that all States come up to the highest 
level and not sink to the lowest common denominator.
  So what this amendment is about is putting into practice what our 
language has been, family values, needs of children, and, of course, to 
save the taxpayer.
  Mr. Chairman, I reserve the balance of my time.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from 
Connecticut [Mrs. Kennelly], the great woman warrior of child support 
enforcement on the Committee on Ways and Means.
  Mrs. KENNELLY. Mr. Chairman, there has been much disagreement on this 
floor the last 2 days, and honest disagreement, on the way we are going 
forward in welfare reform. Of course, that is what this process is 
about and what this democracy is about. But when we come to the 
amendment of the gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema], the 
amendment for child support enforcement, revoking the licenses of 
delinquent parents, I think it is very nice we can come together on 
both sides of the aisle and agree on this amendment to revoke licenses 
of people who do not pay.
  When we say licenses, we are talking about a driver's license, we are 
talking about a professional license. We are talking about saying to 
somebody if you want to have what society can give you and be according 
to the law in the area of what you want to do, such as drive a car 
under the rulings of the State, then you will pay your child support.
  When this amendment came up in the Committee on Ways and Means, we 
had a 17 to 17 tie. The committee discussed it on both sides of the 
aisle, much talk, and we sat and figured out how this could be 
acceptable to all of us. I am delighted that the gentlewoman from New 
Jersey [Mrs. Roukema] has got this amendment on the floor. The Women's 
Caucus, with all the other members, the gentlemen that are members of 
the caucus over the years, this is the idea, to be serious about child 
support enforcement.
  This is tough. This says to people we should collect child support 
enforcement, and if you are going to have to be inconvenienced, it 
might be quite a real inconvenience. I must say in this situation, you 
do not necessarily immediately take away the license. If someone comes 
forth and says ``I am willing to make an agreement, I can only give so 
much,'' and they are up front about it, this can work. It worked in New 
Hampshire, it worked in 19 other States, and I think it can work in a 
Federal way. I think it is nice we can come together on an amendment 
and agree. I thank the gentlewoman for bringing it forth on the floor 
and the gentleman from Florida [Mr. Shaw] for bringing it up again 
after the committee.
  Mr. Chairman, I would like to express my strong support for this 
amendment on revoking the licenses of delinquent parents.
  I offered an identical amendment in the Ways and Means Committee, 
which I regret to say rejected the provision on a 17 to 17 tie vote. I 
said then, and say again now, we should not be squeamish about being as 
tough on delinquent parents as the bill is on mothers and children.
  Nineteen States are already experimenting with restricting 
professional and driver's licenses of delinquent parents and the 
initial indications are very good. For example, Maine has collected $23 
million in additional collections just since August 1993. The State 
only had to revoke 41
 licenses to get this money: in other words, the threat was almost 
always enough.
  California increased collections by $10 million without revoking a 
single license--just by sending out notices to delinquent parents.
  The Department of Health and Human Services look at this evidence and 
estimated that nationwide license revocation could increase child 
support collections by $2.5 billion over 10 years.
  Let us say once and for all that both parents share responsibility 
for their children. I urge my colleagues to support this amendment.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from 
Maryland [Mrs. Morella].
  Mrs. MORELLA. Mr. Chairman, this license revocation amendment is so 
very important to child support enforcement. It had its inception in 
the Women's Caucus child support bill in the last Congress. It was also 
contained in the Women's Caucus bill this year, too.
  The caucus has always felt that license revocation is critical to any 
effective child support reform. I want to thank the gentlewoman from 
New Jersey [Mrs. Roukema], the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. 
Kennelly], and others for their strong support, and the strong support 
of the gentleman from Georgia [Mr. Collins] for this amendment.
  Why must it be done on a Federal level? Because States have been 
notoriously lax in implementing strong child support reforms. This says 
States must have license revocation procedures in place. We now have 19 
States that have revocation procedures in place, and in those cases we 
have found that people immediately get out and write their checks for 
child support, because they do not want to lose their hunting license, 
their driver's license, or their professional license.
  Using as one of the examples Maine, Maine has collected nearly $13 
million in back support and only revoked 15 licenses. Let us support 
this important amendment.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, to extend debate as Mr. 
Archer's designee, I move to strike the last word.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Texas?
  There was no objection.
  The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman is entitled to 5 minutes on his pro forma 
amendment and may control that time or allow that time to be controlled 
by others.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, to extend debate as Mr. Gibbon's designee, I 
move to strike the last word and ask unanimous consent to merge that 
additional time with time I am currently controlling.
  The CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from 
Tennessee?
  There was no objection.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the 
gentleman from Florida [Mr. Shaw], our distinguished chairman of the 
committee that designed such a wonderful welfare bill.
  Mr. SHAW. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
  Mr. Chairman. I would like to stand in support of the amendment, and 
I want to direct my remarks to the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. 
Kennelly] who offered this in the committee, at which time I did vote 
against it. We concocted a variation of it, a much weaker one which 
expressed the desire of the Congress to put this, for the States to put 
this in their own bill. It is effective and it is.
  I would like to say to the gentlewoman I have come along to your way 
of thinking on this and intend to support it, and wanted to be sure 
that I did come forward and congratulate you for being as persistent as 
you were, and also to congratulate the gentlewoman from New Jersey [Mr. 
Roukema] as well as other Members of this Congress, who did work hard 
to see that this became a part of the bill.
  Mrs. KENNELLY. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield?
  Mr. SHAW. I yield to the gentlewoman from Connecticut.
  Mrs. KENNELLY. Mr. Chairman, we did have some good discussion in 
committee. I thank the chairman.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
Colorado [Mr. McInnis].
  Mr. McINNIS. Mr. Chairman, I think this amendment reflects an idea 
that works. In the United States a very interesting statistic is that 4 
percent of 
 [[Page H3630]] our population, 4 percent of our population, is behind 
on their car payments. Almost 50 percent of the population that is 
legally obligated to pay child support is behind on their child support 
payments. This amendment works. It is a good idea.
  Now, some people will say that it is not a good amendment, it is not 
a good idea, because you are taking away the ability for these people 
obligated to pay child support from driving to work. But I ask you to 
take a look at the statistics where it has been tried.
  For example, in Maine, they only had to revoke 41 licenses. Just the 
fear of the revoking of the license brought in $23 million. In 
California, they collected $10 million without revoking one license.
  Mr. Chairman, I commend the sponsors on both sides of the aisle on 
this amendment. This is an idea that works.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from 
Colorado [Mrs. Schroeder].
  Mrs. SCHROEDER. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Tennessee 
for yielding time to me. I thank the gentlewoman from New Jersey for 
bringing this forward.
  The prior speakers have pointed this out. Thank goodness we have had 
the bipartisan Women's Caucus or we would not have this great alliance, 
because the Women's Caucus has been working on this year after year 
after year. And let me tell you how disappointed we were when the 
committee marked up the welfare reform bill of the majority side, the 
Republican side, and there were some Members who had a press conference 
and said how pleased they were it was father friendly.
  Well, let me tell you, first of all, it is not just fathers who miss 
payments. this is really a deadbeat parent issue, unfortunately, 
anymore. But the women have constantly rallied and the Congresswoman 
from New Jersey is reminding us all of that to say that children in a 
divorce should be held economically harmless as long as possible. And 
that is what this is about. This is welfare prevention.
  My colleague from Colorado points out that car
   payments are made almost automatically and yet child support 
payments are ignored. They are going to dig this society up and think 
that we worship cars and did not like our children. There is something 
wrong with that picture.
  I am really glad there has been a change of heart on the other side 
and that they are now going to put this in their bill and that now all 
the bills will be as strong as they can be on child support enforcement 
because it has been much too long in coming.
  The children of America deserve this. They deserve not to have to 
live under the taint of welfare because one parent decided that they 
had had enough of that and wanted to escape. This is about 
responsibility. This is about taking responsibility and enforcing it. 
It is very, very important.
  Again, I thank my colleague from New Jersey and all the Congresswomen 
and the members of the caucus across the aisle who have stood for this 
for so long.
  This is a good day in that no matter what happens, we are going to 
have the highest standard here, and it is about time.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as she may 
consume to the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Johnson].
  (Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut asked and was given permission to revise 
and extend her remarks.)
  Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of this 
amendment and in support of this legislation.
  Mr. Chairman, I rise in strong support of the child support 
provisions in H.R. 1214, the Personal Responsibility Act, including the 
amendments to it that we will consider today.
  I would like to take this opportunity to commend my colleagues on the 
Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues who have worked long and hard 
on child support issues. In particular, Congresswomen Marge Roukema and 
Barbara Kennelly, who served on the U.S. Commission on Interstate Child 
Support, have brought years of leadership and experience to our debate. 
The Child Support Responsibility Act, which we introduced earlier this 
year along with Congresswomen Connie Morella, Patricia Schroeder, and 
Eleanor Holmes Norton, has been largely adopted into the welfare reform 
bill before us today.
  Consequently, I am extremely pleased that the child support title in 
this bill will go a long way toward solving some of the most difficult 
problems in the system. If focuses on locating parents who move from 
State to State in order to avoid paying support, and puts into effect 
tough enforcement mechanisms that will force reluctant parents into 
paying even when we already know their whereabouts. The legislation 
sets up interacting State databases of child support orders, which will 
be matched against basic ``new hire'' data so that State child support 
officials can locate missing, non-paying parents. It applies the same 
wage withholding and enforcement rules to Federal employees, including 
military personnel, as currently apply to the rest of the workforce. It 
makes enforcement of orders for parents who are self-employed easier 
through a number of means, such as the newly adopted amendment to 
administer liens on an interstate level.
  Finally, this legislation contains my provision adopted in the Ways 
and Means Committee that will put work requirements on many 
noncustodial parents who are behind in paying child support, often due 
to their not having a job. Just because a person is not employed does 
not mean his or her obligation to support the child ends. Many children 
are on welfare because one parent is not paying their court-ordered 
child support. This provision requires parents to either pay their 
child support, enter into a repayment plan through the courts, or work 
in a government-sponsored program. Since the government is paying for 
the child's support through a welfare check, it is entirely reasonable 
to expect something in return from the non-paying parent. And we do.
  I am confident that the child support legislation we have before us 
today will result in millions upon millions more dollars being put 
toward the support of children by their parents. It is with great 
enthusiasm that I support the child support enforcement title of the 
bill, as well as the bill as a whole.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield such time as he may 
consume to the gentleman from California [Mr. Cunningham].
  (Mr. CUNNINGHAM asked and was given permission to revise and extend 
his remarks.)
  Mr. CUNNINGHAM. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the amendment. I 
would like to advise the gentlewoman from Colorado, it is the 
Republican bill that is passing it. The democrats would not bring it 
up.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Maryland [Mr. Hoyer].
  Mr. HOYER. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Tennessee for 
yielding time to me. I rise to thank the gentlewoman from New Jersey 
[Mrs. Roukema] for her leadership on this issue and certainly my 
colleague and friend, the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Kennelly], 
who has been in the forefront of this fight, as have others on this 
floor.
  Mr. Chairman, every able-bodied American must understand it is wrong 
to have children you cannot or will not care for and support. The 
message we are sending with this amendment is, if you are a deadbeat 
parent, we are going to pursue you and demand you meet your moral and 
legal obligations to those children you brought into this world.
  It is a simple but a very compelling and important message.
  We understand during the course of this debate that one problem with 
children in America today is that too many people believe that having 
children is a spectator sport. Too many deadbeat dads, unfortunately, 
believe it is a nonparticipatory event after birth.
  This amendment says, you need to care for and support, to the extent 
of your ability, your child. And if you do not, the rest of us, who 
will clearly want to support that child, will, however, exact a price 
from you.
  This is a good amendment. This moves in the right direction. The 
gentleman from Colorado made a very salient point, nobody wants to lose 
their car so they stay current with their car payments. They ought to 
be much more responsible when it comes to caring for the dearest thing 
they may ever have. And that is their child.
  I thank the gentlewoman for offering this amendment.
  Mr. Chairman, every able-bodied American must understand--it is wrong 
to have children you cannot or will not care for.
  And the message we are sending with this amendment is if you are a 
deadbeat parent, we are going to pursue you and demand you 
[[Page H3631]] meet your moral and legal responsibilities to those 
children you brought into this world.
  This amendment puts real teeth into the child support enforcement 
system.
  It would require States to establish procedures under which they 
could withhold, suspend, or restrict State issued licenses of persons 
delinquent in making court ordered child support payments.
  It would give my State of Maryland an additional weapon in its fight 
to collect $771 million in uncollected child support from deadbeat 
parents.
  Last week, the Health and Human Services Department released a study 
which tracked the revocation of State issued licenses from parents 
ignoring child support obligations.
  It estimates that if similar programs were in place nationwide, child 
support collections would grow by $2.5 billion over 10 years. Clearly, 
the mere threat of not receiving or keeping licenses has caused 
deadbeat parents to pay what they owe in child support.
  Moreover, the Congressional Budget Office estimates the Federal 
Government could save $146 million over the first 5 years as a result 
of a nationwide license revocation program. This is a direct savings to 
the American taxpayers.
  If there is a way we can cause deadbeat dads and moms to support 
their children, we must. This amendment provides us with a responsible 
and just action by helping to instill in parents the values needed in 
child rearing. I urge my colleagues to support it.
  Mrs. ROUKEMA. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentleman from 
New Jersey [Mr. Martini].
  Mr. MARTINI. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentlewoman for yielding, time 
to me and applaud her efforts today.
  Mr. Chairman, once again I rise to speak out on the important issue 
of forcing deadbeat parents to pay their fair share of child support. 
In threatening to revoke the drivers or professional licenses of 
parents whose payments are in arrears, Mrs. Roukema has proposed to us 
an enforcement mechanism that will truly go a long way toward 
collecting more money for children in need. Similar to Mr. Upton's 
amendment offered earlier, Mrs. Roukema is championing a plain old 
question of right and wrong. The message is simple if you do not want 
to play by the rules, do not expect privileges from the State. What is 
more, this measure will work.
  Maine instituted the same reform and sent over 22,000 notices in a 
year and a half to deadbeat parents informing them that they were in 
danger of losing their licenses.
  While over 13 million dollars in back support was recovered, only 41 
licenses needed to be revoked.
  I cannot think of any better evidence of this measure's 
effectiveness.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from 
Virginia [Mr. Moran].
  Mr. MORAN. Mr. Chairman, it is encouraging that at least we have 
found one subject on which we all agree, and it is a terribly important 
subject. And whether it is men or women legislators or Republicans and 
Democrats, we realize something has to be done.
  We all know that the single greatest correlative factor to poverty 
and, thus, welfare dependency is teenage girls becoming pregnant, out 
of wedlock, without a man to support the family.
  One thing we may not be aware of, I was shocked when I found out, is 
that the vast majority of the men that are causing teenage pregnancies 
are significantly older adult men. They are men who oftentimes are 
financially independent, and they skip out on their responsibilities. 
But this is much more than skipping out on one's responsibilities.
  What we are left with is a program that in effect punishes the parent 
who raises the child, who assumes responsibility for the discipline, 
the structure, the financial support of that child, worries every day 
about their health care, about their child care, about their 
discipline, while the man who is at least equally responsible has no 
concern for what is happening to the family they created.
  There is probably no greater scandal in American society today than 
to think of the millions of young children of families who are living 
in poverty because of the lack of responsibility and accountability by 
the men who caused those families, who are equally responsible for 
their support. If nothing else happens, we at least will make sure that 
they have to assume their responsibility when welfare reform 
legislation is passed.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1\1/2\ minutes to the gentlewoman 
from California [Ms. Eshoo].
  Ms. ESHOO. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman from Tennessee for 
yielding time to me.
  I rise in support of the Roukema amendment. I would like to salute 
the gentlewoman from New Jersey for her decade-long effort on this as 
well as the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Mrs. Kennelly] and the women 
that have worked long before me in the <strong>House</strong> of Representatives through 
the bipartisan Women's Causus.
  Mr. Chairman, this bipartisan measure would put real teeth in the 
enforcement of child support payments by requiring states to establish 
license revocation programs for deadbeat parents.
  According to a recent HHS study, 19 States have already adopted this. 
Just the threat of revoking licenses has raised $35 million in nine 
States that collect these statistics. In fact, my own State of 
California has collected over $10 million of outstanding child support 
since beginning its program in late 1992.
  If similar programs were in place nationwide--as this amendment would 
require-child support collections would grow by $2.5 billion over 10 
years and Federal welfare spending would shrink by $146 million in half 
that time.
  Mr. Chairman, revoking a license is a powerful tool for enforcing 
child support. The Roukema amendment would put this tool in the hands 
of officials who need it and put money in the pockets of families who 
deserve it and where it should be. I urge my colleagues to support this 
bipartisan proposal.
  And again, I would like to pay tribute to the gentlewomen, the great 
women that have served before us and those that have brought this 
forward.
  Mr. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I yield 1 minute to the gentlewoman from New 
York [Mrs. Lowey].
  (Mrs. LOWEY asked and was given permission to revise and extend her 
remarks.)
  Mrs. LOWEY. Mr. Chairman, I rise today in strong support of the 
Roukema amendment to the child support enforcement provisions contained 
in this bill. Many members of the congressional caucus for women's 
issues, particularly Congresswomen Barbara Kennelly and Lynn Woolsey, 
have long worked for comprehensive, fundamental reforms of the child 
support enforcement system. We are pleased that many of the provisions 
of the caucus bill were incorporated into the current bill by the Ways 
and Means Committee.
  Child support enforcement is essential to the reform of the welfare 
system. Deadbeat parents in the United States owe over $34 billion to 
their children--more than the cost of the entire welfare system. To 
help families stay off welfare in the first place, we must strengthen 
the child support enforcement system and demand that parents support 
the child they bring into this world.
  This amendment, building on the work of Congresswoman Kennelly, does 
just this: It strengthens the enforcement provisions in the bill. We're 
reforming the system now, because families and children can't enforce 
the laws on their own. They need our help.
  By requiring States to establish procedures under which they would 
withhold, suspend, or restrict the State-issued licenses of persons who 
are delinquent in making court-ordered child support payments, the 
amendment provides the leverage States need to convince deadbeat 
parents to pay-up. This amendment, by giving children and families the 
assurance that States will take away privileges this society has 
granted to parents, should send a strong message that those parents 
must fulfill their obligations to their own offspring. What is more, we 
know this works in the States that have already established license 
revocation procedures.
  Let us build on what works and pass this amendment. Let's help 
children recover the support owed to them.
  Mr. SAM JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Chairman, I yield 30 seconds to the 
gentleman from Louisiana [Mr. McCrery].
  Mr. McCRERY. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for yielding time to 
me.
[[Continued on page H3632]]
</pre>
</body>
</html>
