<html>
<head>
<title>WAIS Document Retrieval</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
[Congressional Record: March 21, 1995 (<strong>House</strong>)]
[Page H3333-H3334]
From the Congressional Record Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:cr21mr95-52]                         


              CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS POSE THREAT
  The SPEAKER pro tempore. Under the Speaker's announced policy of 
January 4, 1995, the gentleman from Alabama [Mr. Browder] is recognized 
during morning business for 5 minutes.
  [[Page H3334]] Mr. BROWDER. Mr. Speaker, I was not surprised by 
yesterday's nerve agent incident in Tokyo. Now I am concerned about 
what might happen here in the United States.
  Let me read, Mr. Speaker, from a special inquiry which I chaired in 
1993 dealing with the growing threat of chemical and biological 
weapons. One of our conclusions was,
       The prospects for chemical and biological terrorism have 
     probably increased as terrorists and sponsors of terrorism 
     acquire chemical and biological warfare agents and weapons. 
     As a consequence, the possibility of terrorist use of such 
     agents against the United States or one of its allies cannot 
     be discounted and should not be ignored. The United States 
     should strengthen emergency planning to respond to a 
     potential terrorist use of chemical or biological weapons.
  Well-trained and equipped military personnel can survive and fight a 
chemical war, but civilians cannot deal with chemical attack. Chemical 
weapons have been called the poor man's atom bomb because they are 
cheap and easy to make and because civilians are thoroughly panicked by 
chemical weapons.
  Look at today's headlines.
  The Washington Post, ``Nations Unready To Thwart Mass Poisoning.''
  The Washington Times, ``Subway Gassing Called a Preview of Terrorist 
Future.''
  USA Today, ``Transit System Alert Urged. Officials Fear Copycat of 
Japanese Gas Attack.''
  The New York Daily News says, ``New York's Subway Riders' Nightmare. 
We Have No Plan.''
  Mr. Speaker, it is only a matter of time before terrorists, 
extortionists or deranged individuals and groups targeted Americans. 
That is why I am asking American defense intelligence and emergency 
preparedness officials to tell me and the American people just what our 
Government is doing to prepare for chemical and biological terrorism 
here in the United States.
                          ____________________


</pre>
</body>
</html>
