<html>
<head>
<title>WAIS Document Retrieval</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
[Congressional Record: March 23, 1995 (<strong>House</strong>)]
[Page H3710-H3711]
From the Congressional Record Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:cr23mr95-107]                         
     MEMBERS' DISCUSSION RELATIVE TO RECOGNITION IN SPECIAL ORDERS
  The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. Calvert). The gentleman from Illinois, 
Mr. Ewing, is recognized.
  Mr. GREENWOOD. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that my name be 
substituted for that of Mr. Ewing.
  The SPEAKER pro tempore. Without objection.
  Mr. GENE GREEN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I would object.
  Mr. GREENWOOD. Would that be the gentleman to whom I yielded half my 
time last night objecting?
  Mr. GENE GREEN of Texas. I thought we were under a five-minute rule. 
I would be glad to yield time when I come, but, Mr. Speaker, if we 
 [[Page H3711]] are going to have that as a procedure, then we will 
probably have about 20 Democrats over here.
  Mr. GREENWOOD. It was a procedure that your side began earlier in the 
evening.
  Mr. GENE GREEN of Texas. We have someone who has already spoken, Mr. 
Speaker.
  Mr. GREENWOOD. No, I have not spoken.
  Mr. LaHOOD. Parliamentary inquiry.
  The SPEAKER pro tempore. State your inquiry.
  Mr. LaHOOD. Previously when a Member from the other side asked to 
have their name substituted earlier this evening, it was allowed. But 
if you do not want to play by those rules, that is fine, Mr. Green, but 
that is what we were doing earlier on.
  Mr. GENE GREEN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I was under the impression that 
Mr. Greenwood had spoken earlier under the 5-minute rule. If he has 
not, and I will take your word for it because I know you spoke, but 
maybe it was yielded because we have been yielding time to many 
different people.
  The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman has not spoken on his own 
time.
  Mr. GENE GREEN of Texas. I will withdraw my objection.
  Mr. GREENWOOD. Actually, my intention is to yield some time to your 
side because I think the Nation deserves a little debate.
  Mr. Brown, if you would like to step up, I would like to yield some 
time to you so we could have a colloquy here because I was mystified by 
your comments.
                          ____________________


</pre>
</body>
</html>
