<html>
<head>
<title>WAIS Document Retrieval</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
[Congressional Record: January 6, 1995 (<strong>Senate</strong>)]
[Page S575-S576]
From the Congressional Record Online via GPO Access [wais.access.gpo.gov]
[DOCID:cr06ja95-41]                         



          UNITED STATES ARMS EMBARGO ON BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
  Mr. DOLE. Mr. President, 2 days ago I introduced legislation together 
with the distinguished Senator from Connecticut, Senator Lieberman, to 
terminate the United States arms embargo on Bosnia-Herzegovina as of 
May 1, 1995.
  As I mentioned in my remarks at the that time, I believed that this 
legislation was not only consistent with international law in upholding 
Bosnia's inherent right to self-defense, but that it would also serve 
to provide some badly needed leverage for the Bosnians on the 
diplomatic side.
  I understand that today, Adm. Leighton Smith, commander of NATO 
Forces in Southern Europe told reporters that he opposed this 
legislation. I am not
 surprised that a four-star admiral would not oppose his Commander in 
Chief, nor that a NATO commander would not choose to contradict the 
NATO-Secretary General.
  I would note, however, that in addition to candidate Bill Clinton, 
the following former high-level Government officials, including Cabinet 
members, have publicly supported lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia: 
Zbigniew Brzezinski; Frank Carlucci; George 
[[Page S576]] Shultz; Jeane Kirkpatrick; Paul Wolfowitz; Richard Perle; 
and Max Kampelman--quite an impressive list. Moreover, I would 
emphasize that the late Manfred Woerner, the previous Secretary 
General, advocated helping the victims of aggression, especially when 
the international community does not have the resolve to take action on 
behalf of that victim. That is surely the case in Bosnia.
  It seems to me however, that the views that should be given the most 
weight, are those of the Bosnians. It is their country and their future 
we are talking about.
  And so, I would like to share two letters with my colleagues which I 
received from the President of Bosnia, Alija Izetbegovic, and from the 
Bosnian Ambassador to the United Nations, Muhamed Sacirbey. Both 
letters strongly support the Dole/Lieberman bill. First I would like to 
quote from President Izetbegovic's letter to me:
       The leadership of the United States of America is essential 
     in the search for peace in the Republic of Bosnia and 
     Herzegovina. The legislation that you and Senator Lieberman 
     have offered is entirely supportive of peace efforts and the 
     continuing leadership of your country in this matter.
       We wholeheartedly concur that the arms embargo should be 
     terminated ``de facto'' no later than May 1, 1995. By such 
     date the preliminary agreement on the cessation of 
     hostilities would have expired and by then the Serbians would 
     have opted to accept the contract group peace plan or to 
     continue the war. We believe that this legislation would be 
     most pivotal not only in confronting international aggression 
     and acts of genocide against our Republic, but also in 
     encouraging the Serbians to opt for peace.
  The letter from Ambassador Sacirbey states the following, and I 
quote,
       We wish to reiterate our full support for congressional 
     efforts, in particular S. 21, to terminate the application of 
     the U.S. arms embargo on the Government of the Republic of 
     Bosnia and Herzegovina * * * The elements of your proposed 
     legislation are in complete convergence with our views. We 
     are also of the opinion that this legislation is entirely 
     consistent with the search for peace in our country * * *
  We need to keep things in perspective. The strains within NATO have 
not been caused by congressional efforts to lift the embargo, but the 
present policy itself. The credibility of the alliance has been damaged 
because NATO has allowed itself to become a subcontractor to the United 
Nations. The only way to reverse this situation is for the United 
States to reassert its leadership in support of a better policy. The 
Clinton administration was on the right track in May 1993, it is now 
time to get back on that track.
  Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the letters I referred to 
be printed in the Record.
  There being no objection, the letters were ordered to be printed in 
the Record, as follows:
         Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Permanent Mission to 
           the United Nations,
                                        New York, January 4, 1995.
     Hon. Robert Dole,
     Majority Leader, U.S. <strong>Senate</strong>, Washington, DC.
       Dear Majority Leader: We wish to reiterate our full support 
     for Congressional efforts, in particular S. 21, to terminate 
     the application of the U.S. arms embargo on the Government of 
     the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must also express 
     our sincere appreciation for these efforts and our admiration 
     for the thoughtful manner by which this matter has been 
     guided by you. The elements of your proposed legislation are 
     in complete convergence with our views.
       We also are of the opinion that this legislation is 
     entirely consistent with the search for peace in our country 
     and the congressional intent established during the debate on 
     this issue during the previous Congressional session. The 
     United States delegation to the United Nations, under the 
     capable and faithful direction of Ambassador Madeleine K. 
     Albright, had ``tabled'' a draft resolution within the 
     Security Council to lift the arms embargo on our Government. 
     Unfortunately, this resolution met resistance from some key 
     nations in the Council, although it has never been put to a 
     vote. In fact, our efforts to facilitate a consensus on this 
     matter through flexibility were misconstrued and have not met 
     with a positive response.
       We believe that U.S. leadership in bringing an end to this 
     unjust arms embargo continues to be an essential element in 
     ending this international aggression and acts of genocide 
     against my country.
       Once again, thank you for your leadership regarding this 
     matter.
           Sincerely,
                                                 Muhamed Sacirbey,
     Ambassador and Permanent Representative.
                                                                    ____
         Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Office of the 
           President of the Presidency,
                                                  January 5, 1995.
     Hon. Robert Dole,
     Majority Leader, U.S. <strong>Senate</strong>, Washington, DC.
       Dear Majority Leader: The leadership of the United States 
     of America is essential in the search for peace in the 
     Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The legislation that you 
     and Senator Lieberman have offered is entirely supportive of 
     peace efforts and the continuing leadership of your country 
     in this matter.
       We wholeheartedly concur that the arms embargo should be 
     terminated ``de facto'' no later than May 1, 1995. By such 
     date at the preliminary agreement on the ``cessation of 
     hostilities'' would have expired and by then the Serbians 
     would have opted to accept the Contact Group Peace Plan or to 
     continue the war. We believe that this legislation would be 
     most pivotal not only in confronting international aggression 
     and acts of genocide against our Republic but also in 
     encouraging the Serbians to opt for peace.
       Once again, I would like to thank you personally and your 
     colleagues for your support for peace in our Republic.
       Please accept the renewed assurances of my highest 
     consideration.
           Sincerely,
                                                 Alija Izetbegovic
  Mr. DOLE. Mr. President, let me suggest to my colleagues that we will 
try to wrap up business because I think the streets are getting a 
little icy out there, and it may be that we need to get home.
                          ____________________


</pre>
</body>
</html>
